Information Ventures, Inc., No. 4259 (August 5, 1997).
Docket No. SIC-97-7-17-23



                   UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
               OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
                      WASHINGTON,  D.C


___________________________________
                                   )
SIC APPEAL OF:                     )
                                   )
Information Ventures, Inc.         )
                                   )   Docket No. SIC-97-7-17-23
     Appellant                     )
                                   )   Decided:  August 5, 1997
Solicitation No.                   )
NIH-ES-97-24                       )
National Institute of Environmental)
  Health Sciences                  )
Research Triangle Park             )
North Carolina                     )
___________________________________)



                         APPEARANCES

              Bruce H. Kleinstein for Appellant


                           DIGEST
                              
A solicitation which requires the successful contractor to
provide a broad range of support services in connection with
the establishment of a Center for the assessment of human
reproductive health risks, but no research, is properly
classified under Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
code 9999 (Nonclassifiable Establishments), with a $5
million average annual receipts size standard, and not under
SIC code 8731 (Commercial Physical and Biological Research),
with a 500-employee size standard, as classified by the
Contracting Officer.

                          DECISION
                              
BLAZSIK,  Administrative Judge:


                        Jurisdiction

     This appeal is decided under the Small Business Act of
1958, 15 U.S.C. Sections 631 et seq., and 13 C.F.R. Parts
121 and 134 (1996).

                            Issue

     Whether a solicitation that requires the successful
offeror to provide a broad range of support services in
connection with the establishment of a Center for the
assessment of human reproductive health risks, but no
research, is properly classified under Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) code 9999, or under SIC code 8731, as
classified by the Contracting Officer.

                            Facts

     On July 14, 1997, the Contracting Officer for the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS),
Research Contract Branch, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, issued this negotiated small business set-aside
procurement for a Center for the assessment of human
reproductive health risks.  He classified it under Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) code 8731 (Commercial
Physical and Biological Research), which has a 500-employee
size standard.  Initial proposals are due on August 29,
1997.

                      Statement of Work
                              
     The purpose of the procurement is to establish a Center
for the assessment of reproductive health risks, which
ultimately will develop into an independent organization.
The operation of the Center will involve the Center staff, a
Project Officer, and committees composed of contract,
government, and non-government members.   There will be an
Oversight Committee made up of the Project Officer, NIEHS
experts in reproductive toxicology, and representatives of
the Federal government and the public; a Core Committee
consisting of two senior scientists, the Project Officer,
and three outside experts not associated with the Center;
and  Expert Panels consisting of 10-15 scientific experts in
the field of reproductive toxicology.

      The contractor will perform the following specific
tasks:  Identify and select experts to conduct the
assessments, and establish a directory of these experts;
collect, analyze, and summarize relevant scientific
literature for the Core Committee's review, and establish
and maintain databases; send papers, list of references, and
meeting agendas to Expert Panel members; coordinate
convening of the Expert Panel's meetings and monitor
meetings; incorporate the Expert Panel's draft reports into
a final report in draft monograph form, and send the draft
to the Expert Panel members for review and approval; and
establish an Internet Website for the Reproductive
Toxicology Center to serve the information needs of the
general public.

     The procurement requires the contractor to provide the
following types of personnel:  a Senior Toxicologist, to
work with the Project Officer; a Toxicologist, to assist the
Senior Toxicologist; a Management Coordinator, to help in
the organization and coordination of the Center's meetings,
manage the purchase of supplies and equipment, and oversee
general accounting matters; an Information Specialist, to
generally assist the Center's staff; and a Computer
Specialist, to work with the Information Specialist to
establish the directory of experts, a reference database,
and assist staff in computer-based communication and Website
updates.
     
                         The Appeal
                              
     On July 17, 1997, Information Ventures, Inc.
(Appellant) telefaxed an appeal to this Office from the
Contracting Officer's classification of this procurement
under SIC code 8731.  Appellant asserts the procurement does
not involve commercial physical or biological research but,
rather, involves numerous and varied support services to
study reproductive health risks.  The services include, but
are not limited to establishing a registry and a Center of
experts; organizing and holding conferences; creating an
Internet Website; and preparing for publication and
distribution reports generated by the center's members.

     Finally, Appellant asserts, because the SIC category,
Division I-Services, does not contain any SIC codes that
clearly encompass the services required by this procurement,
Appellant asserts the appropriate classification is SIC code
9999 (Nonclassifiable Establishments), with a $5 million
average annual receipts size standard.  See 13 C.F.R.
Section 121.201.
     
     The Contracting Officer did not file a response to the
appeal.

                         Discussion
                              
     Because Appellant filed this appeal within ten calendar
days of the issuance of the procurement, the appeal is
timely.  13 C.F.R. Section 134.304(a)(3).

     In a SIC appeal, Appellant has the burden of proof, by
a preponderance of the evidence, to show error in the
Contracting Officer's SIC code designation.  SIC Appeal of
The Scientific Consulting Group, Inc., No. 4186 (1996).
Here, the Contracting Officer selected SIC code 8731.  As
described in the SIC Manual,*  this industry includes-
     
     establishments primarily engaged in commercial
     physical and biological research and development
     on a contract or fee basis....

     The description of this SIC code lists, among others,
the following types of research: agricultural research;
biological research; chemical laboratories; engineering
laboratories; and research and development, physical and
biological: commercial.

     Footnote 10 to SIC code 8731 further clarifies the
description.  It states:

          (1)  Research and Development means laboratory or other
     physical research and development.  It does not include
     economic, educational, engineering, operations, systems, or
     other nonphysical research; or computer programming  data
     processing, commercial and/or medical laboratory testing.

          (2)  For purposes of the Small Business Innovative
     Research program only, a different definition has been
     established by law....
     
           (3)   Research  and development  for  guided
     missiles  and space vehicles includes  evaluations
     and   simulation,  and  other  services  requiring
     thorough   knowledge  of  complete  missiles   and
     spacecraft.

13 C.F.R. Section 121.201.

     The Presiding Judge's examination of the Statement of
Work shows the enumerated tasks do not encompass commercial
physical and biological research, as those terms are defined
in the SIC Manual  (including the specific examples noted
there and in footnote 10).   In fact, the procurement does
not contemplate that the successful contractor will engage
in any commercial physical or biological research.
     
      Rather, the procurement requires a broad range of
support services needed to establish and maintain a research
Center.  These include, but are not limited to, managing the
Center; establishing computer capability for the Center's
work; and the publication and dissemination of the Center's
work product to a wide audience.
     
     The Statement of Work here requires different types of
work than in previous cases involving SIC code 8731, where
this Office has limited the application of SIC code 8731 to
those procurements whose primary activity is scientific
research, rather than the support services described here.

     See,  for example,  SIC Appeal of Engineering Spectrum
Incorporated, No. 3899 (1994), (development and testing of
biological systems for military aricraft missions, including
the design and testing of research instruments and
equipment, and laboratory testing of systems and
subsystems); SIC Appeal of Judith A. Watts, No. 3807 (1993),
(research, testing, simulation, data-gathering, software and
hardware development, design and analysis for space flight
propulsion systems); SIC Appeal of Malcolm Thomas
Industries, Inc.,  No. 3667 (1992), (research and testing of
aerospace and guided missile systems); SIC Appeal of
DynCorp., No. 3274 (1990) (research, development, and
testing of a missile systems).
     
       Accordingly, the Presiding Judge agrees with
Appellant that the Contracting Officer improperly selected
SIC code 8731 here, because the procurement services does
not involve research.   The Presiding Judge also agrees
there is no specific SIC code classification that
corresponds to the varied services required by this
procurement, as enumerated under the applicable category,
Division I-Services.  Therefore, the Presiding Judge
concludes, consistent with the express provision of 13
C.F.R. Section 121.201, that the most appropriate
classification for this procurement is SIC code 9999
(Nonclassifiable Establishments), with a $5 million average
annual receipts size standard.
     
                         Conclusion
                              
     The correct SIC code for this procurement is SIC code
9999.  The Contracting Officer's designation is REVERSED,
and the appeal is GRANTED.

     This is the Small Business Administration's final
decision.  See 13 C.F.R. Section 134.316(b).




                        ______________________________
                        GLORIA E. BLAZSIK
                        Administrative Judge


_______________________________
     * Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987
Edition, Office of Management and Budget.

                                Posted: August, 1997
