Questions & Answers:
 ABOUT THE REFERENDUM ON THE PORK CHECKOFF PROGRAM:

Why are rules being proposed for a referendum on the pork check-off program?

Later this year, the Department of Agriculture (Department) will conduct a
referendum to determine whether producers and importers favor continuation of
the pork checkoff program. We want to make sure that our voting procedures and
ballots are easily understood and fair. By sharing our proposed procedures and
ballots in this document, we can get your feedback on how to make this voting
process the best possible.  

How long do I have to comment on the proposed rule? 
     
You have 30 days to comment on this proposal. That means your written comments
must be received by May 18, 2000. You can mail, fax, or e-mail your comments.
Additionally, you have 60 days to provide written comments to OMB on the
paperwork burden associated with this proposal. Those comments must be
received by June 19, 2000.   

Who is eligible to vote in the referendum?
  
People and businesses who pay the pork checkoff are eligible to vote. This
means that there are three types of eligible voters: (1) persons who produce
and sell hogs and pigs in the United States in their own name; (2) persons who
import hogs, pigs, or pork products into the United States in their own name;
and (3) persons who are designated to cast the single vote for a business that
produces and sells, or imports hogs, pigs, or pork products into the United
States. In all cases, to be eligible, the person or business would have had to
sell hogs, pigs or pork products sometime during the year preceding the
referendum voting period.  

Persons ineligible to vote include persons who do not pay the pork checkoff
such as contract growers as well as persons who left hog farming more than 1
year before the referendum.   

When will the referendum be held?

As soon as we analyze comments on this proposal and make necessary refinements
to these voting procedures, a final rule will be published in the Federal
Register. The final rule will designate two consecutive business days during
which producers may vote in-person at the FSA county offices as well as the
procedures and dates for casting an absentee ballot. Importers will vote only
by mail during the period provided for producer balloting. 

Where do I vote if I'm a U.S. producer?

In-person voting will take place at the Department's FSA county offices. If
you currently participate in FSA programs, you should vote at the FSA county
office where you normally do business. If you do not participate in FSA
programs, go to the FSA office in the county where you raise hogs and pigs(or
if you raise hogs and pigs in more than one county, the FSA county office
where most of your business is conducted). All FSA office locations can be
found on the FSA website at www.fsa.usda.gov/pas/search.htm.

Can I vote by absentee ballot?

Yes. We recognize that producers are very busy so absentee balloting will be
allowed. Eligible voters may request an absentee ballot from the appropriate
county FSA office.  Absentee ballots will be available beginning 30 days
before the in-person voting. Producers can stop by FSA county offices at their
convenience to pick up a ballot or request one by mail. To count, absentee
ballots must be postmarked by the last day of the voting period and be
received no later than five business days following the voting period.  

Where do I vote if I'm an importer?

Voting will take place by mail. Importers can request a ballot from the FSA
headquarters office in Washington, D.C., at the address listed in this
proposed rule.

How will the Department make certain that only eligible persons vote in the
referendum? 

FSA county offices will publicly display a list of all people who have voted
at that office, by absentee ballot as well as in-person. This will allow
scrutiny by everyone. If a producer believes that an ineligible person has
voted, he or she can challenge that person's ballot. Once a challenge is made,
the Department will investigate and determine whether a voting violation has
occurred. The Department will require importers to submit proof that they paid
the pork assessment when they request their ballots.