
   NEWS/SUN SENTINEL COMPANY, PETITIONER V. NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS
BOARD

   No. 89-1641

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1989

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The District Of Columbia Circuit

   Brief For The National Labor Relations Board In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-8a) is reported
at 890 F.2d 430.  The decision and order of the National Labor
Relations Board (Pet. App. 10a-14a), including the decision of the
administrative law judge (Pet. App. 15a-33a), is reported at 290
N.L.R.B. No. 156.  The Board's order denying petitioner's motion for
reconsideration (Pet. App. 39a-40a) is unreported.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 9a) was entered on
November 17, 1989.  A petition for rehearing was denied on January 16,
1990.  App., infra, la.  /1/ The petition for a writ of certiorari was
filed on April 16, 1990.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked
under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the National Labor Relations Board reasonably found that
the conduct of the union merger election satisfied minimum standards
of due process and thus accurately reflected the employees' true
desires.

                               STATEMENT

   1. For some 30 years prior to 1985, petitioner had recognized the
Fort Lauderdale Typographical Union Local No. 895 (Local 895) as the
representative of its composing room employees.  The most recent
collective bargaining agreement between petitioner and Local 895
expired in June 1984.  No agreement was reached on a new contract, and
petitioner implemented its final offer in March 1985.  /2/ The parties
met again in April without reaching agreement.  In October, at Local
895's request, it was placed under trusteeship by its parent
organization, the International Typographical Union (ITU).  /3/ The
ITU then authorized a merger between Local 895 and Local 430, and a
merger election was scheduled for December 11.  Pet. App. 17a-18a.

   The ITU sent mail ballots to members of Local 895, and the merger
was discussed at membership meetings in November and early December.
The mail ballots, which were returned in sealed envelopes and
separately counted, yielded a tally of 74 in favor of the merger and
29 opposed.  Pet. App. 18a, 27a.

   In addition, the ITU-appointed trustee received permission from
petitioner to conduct a merger vote in the composing room among
nonunion members in the bargaining unit, and a notice of the merger
vote was posted in the composing room.  Pet. App. 18a-19a.  On the day
of the election, nonunion members were given ballots and permitted to
vote by placing a ballot in the opening of a padlocked ballot box.
Local 895 Secretary-Treasurer Sakowski kept the padlocked box by his
work station during the first work shift.  It was left unattended in
petitioner's maintenance room with a tape over the opening for three
to four hours during the second shift.  Id. at 19a, 23a.  The
eligibility list used by Local 895 for the composing room voting
showed that 40 employees were given ballots in the composing room and
that 36 of them had placed their ballots in the ballot box.  /4/ The
tally of ballots for the composing room totaled 44 ballots, 41 for
merger and 3 against.  Id. at 22a.  The total tally of the Local 895
vote was 115 for merger and 32 against.  Id. at 19a.

   On December 17, the trustee of Local 895 informed petitioner that
the bargaining unit employees had voted 115 to 32 in favor of merging
with Local 430 and that the merger would be effective on January 1,
1986.  He requested a meeting to negotiate a new agreement.  Pet. App.
19a, 29a.  On January 27, 1986, petitioner responded that it
understood that Local 895 "no longer exists and will no longer
represent" its composing room employees, and that it did not believe
that Local 430 "legally represents" those employees.  It refused to
recognize and bargain with Local 430 as their representative.  Id. at
19a-20a.

   2. The Board affirmed the findings and conclusions of the ALJ.  The
Board held that petitioner's refusal to bargain with the merged union
violated Section 8(a)(1) and (5) of the National Labor Relations Act,
29 U.S.C. 158(a)(1) and (5), and it ordered petitioner to recognize
and bargain with Local 430.  Pet. App. 12a, 31a-33a.  The Board
applied its traditional two-pronged test to determine whether
petitioner was obligated to recognize and bargain with the merged
union -- i.e., whether the merger vote occurred under "circumstances
satisfying minimum due process" /5/ and whether there was substantial
continuity between the pre- and post-merger union.  The Board found
that both conditions were satisfied here.  Id. at 24a-31a.

   Initially, the Board observed that petitioner bore the burden of
proving an "irregularity in the voting process as it is (petitioner)
that is relying on the irregularity as justification for its refusal
to bargain." Pet. App. 26a, citing Insulfab Plastics, Inc., 274
N.L.R.B. 817 (1985).  The Board found that petitioner had failed to
show that the procedures used in the vote "were so irregular or so
unmindful of due process as to invalidate the election." Pet. App.
26a.  Thus, the Board found no evidence of irregularities in the mail
vote conducted among union members, which had produced an overwhelming
vote in favor of the merger.  /6/ It also found that, with the
possible exception of one nonmember who gave her ballot to union
official Sakowski for deposit in the ballot box, there was no evidence
that the composing room balloting was not secret.  Id. at 27a.  /7/
The Board added that, even if all the composing room ballots were not
counted, the result would be the same.  Ibid.  It also noted that
there was no evidence of any employee challenge to the conduct of the
election or dissatisfaction with the election process.  Id. at 28a.
/8/

   Finally, the Board found that there was substantial continuity
between the pre-merger Local 895 and the post-merger Local 430.  The
changes resulting from the merger, the Board concluded, were not
"sufficiently dramatic to alter the union's identity." Pet. App. 11a
n.1, citing May Dep't Stores Co., 289 N.L.R.B. No. 88 (June 30, 1988),
slip op. 14, and NLRB v. Financial Institution Employees, Local No.
1182 (Seattle-First), 475 U.S. 192, 206 (1986).  /9/

   3. The court of appeals upheld the Board's findings and
conclusions, and enforced its order.  The court held that the Board
was justified in finding on the record evidence that there was
sufficient continuity between the pre- and post-merger union.  Pet.
App. 5a.  /10/ It also found that the record did not support
petitioner's contention that procedural irregularities in the election
violated minimum standards of due process.  Ibid.

   The court agreed with the Board that an employer challenging a
merger election must make an evidentiary showing of irregularity
before the burden shifts to the General Counsel to make an affirmative
showing of regularity, and that there was no evidence to suggest any
taint in the mail balloting.  /11/ It found that "(a)bsent any
evidence of irregularity," the mail vote "is a reliable indicator of
majority sentiment." Pet. App. 5a-6a.  The court also found that
petitioner had presented insufficient evidence of irregularity to
disturb the composing room results.  It rejected petitioner's
contention that the composing room procedures failed to insure that
employees who voted in person did not also vote by mail, finding that
the few discrepancies shown by the evidence were insufficient to
undermine the vote in favor of merger.  It agreed with the Board that
requirements as to the custody of the ballot box in Board-conducted
elections do not apply to a union merger election, and found that the
composing room procedures "were not so lacking in safeguards as to
cast substantial doubt on the election outcome." Id. at 6a.

                               ARGUMENT

   The court of appeals' decision is correct, and does not conflict
with any decision of this Court or any other court of appeals.
Accordingly, review by this Court is not warranted.

   This Court held in Seattle-First that the Board had exceeded its
authority by imposing, atop its traditional minimum due process
requirements, the requirement that nonmembers be allowed to
participate in an affiliation or merger vote.  475 U.S. at 201-209.
/12/ Although the Court noted that "the NLRA does not require unions
to follow specified procedures in deciding matters such as
affiliations," the Court nonetheless concluded that it "need not
assess the propriety of the Board's past (due process) procedures."
Id. at 199 n.6.  This case also provides no occasion for the Court to
consider that question, since petitioner does not contest the
propriety of the Board's due process requirements.  Instead,
petitioner only contends, Pet. i, 7, that the Board erred in finding
that those requirements were satisfied in this case.  That essentially
fact-bound issue does not warrant review by this Court.

   In any event, the court below correctly upheld the Board's findings
that the election was fairly conducted.  In concluding that the merger
vote procedures did not fall below its standards, the Board considered
the record evidence in light of its long-standing rules that an
employer who challenges a merger vote must make an affirmative showing
of material irregularity and that union reorganization votes need not
conform to the standards adhered to in Board conducted elections.
/13/ The Board found, and the court of appeals agreed, that there was
no evidence that the mail balloting by union members was tainted, and
under this Court's decision in Seattle-First, Local 430 was not
required to give nonmembers an opportunity to vote on the merger.  In
any event, the Board found, and the court of appeals agreed, that any
duplicative voting in the composing room had been minimal, and that
the ballot box discrepancy was insignificant.  Those findings do not
warrant further review.  /14/

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of a certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   JOHN G. ROBERTS, JR.

      Acting Solicitor General /15/

   JERRY M. HUNTER

      General Counsel

   D. RANDALL FRYE

      Associate General Counsel

   ROBERT E. ALLEN

      Associate General Counsel

   NORTON J. COME

      Deputy Associate General Counsel

   LINDA SHER

      Assistant General Counsel

   CARMEL P. EBB

      Attorney

   MAY 1990

   /1/ The order denying the petition for rehearing is not included in
the petition appendix, but is reprinted in an appendix to this brief.

   /2/ Further references are to 1985 unless otherwise indicated.

   /3/ Local 895 sought the trusteeship because of "burn out" among
its current officers and its inability to recruit new officers from
within.  The current officers felt that a trusteeship might lead to a
resumption of negotiations with petitioner and would facilitate a
merger between Local 895 and another ITU local, Miami Typographical
Union No. 430 (Local 430), a step that the locals had been discussing
for some time.  Pet. App. 17a-18a.

   /4/ Sakowski also gave ballots to union members who assured him
that they had not received mail ballots, and he deposited his own mail
ballot in the ballot box.  C.A. App. 316, 319.

   /5/ This includes notice of the election to all voters, an
opportunity for voters to discuss the election, and reasonable
precautions to maintain ballot secrecy.  See Newspapers, Inc., 210
N.L.R.B. 8, 9 (1974), enforced, 515 F.2d 334 (5th Cir. 1975).

   /6/ The Board found no evidence that any member did not receive his
ballot or was otherwise deprived of his right to vote, or that the
mail balloting, which had been separately tallied, "was tainted in any
manner whatsoever." Pet. App. 27a.  It added that, assuming that some
members had deposited their mail ballots in the ballot box, or even
that some members had voted in the composing room in addition to
voting by mail, the election outcome would not have been affected.
Ibid.

   /7/ The Board rejected petitioner's contention that evidence that
the ballot box was unattended was sufficient proof of a lack of due
process where, as here, there was no evidence the box had been
tampered with.  Pet. App. 28a. citing Hammond Publishers, Inc., 286
N.L.R.B. No. 6 (Sept. 30, 1987).

   /8/ The Board found that an employee decertification petition,
filed in February 1986, after petitioner had refused to bargain with
Local 430, had no relevance to the merger.  Pet. App. 28a, 40a n.2.
Citing Franks Bros. v. NLRB, 321 U.S. 702, 704 (1944), the Board
declined to permit the decertification petition filed after
petitioner's unlawful refusal to bargain to serve as a "barometer of
employee sentiment * * * (or) as a basis for an election." Pet. App.
40a n.2.

   /9/ The Board found that some of the officers of Local 895 became
officers of the merged union, and that the authority of the chapel,
consisting only of petitioner's composing room employees, remained
substantially unaltered with respect to collective bargaining and
contract administration.  Pet. App. 11a n.1.

   /10/ Petitioner does not challenge that finding in this Court.

   /11/ The court observed that, while the mail balloting did not
conform to the Board's standards for its own elections, those
standards do not govern union conducted elections.  Pet. App. 6a.

   /12/ Although Seattle-First involved an independent local union's
affiliation with an international organization, the same standards
apply to other union organizational restructuring, such as merger.
Hydrotherm, Inc., 280 N.L.R.B. 1425, 1428 (1986).  See also May Dep't
Stores Co., 289 N.L.R.B. No. 88 (June 30, 1988), slip op. 2 n.4.

   /13/ Both of these rules have been approved by the courts.  See,
e.g., NLRB v. Insulfab Plastics, Inc., 789 F.2d 961, 965-968 (1st Cir.
1986), enforcing 274 N.L.R.B. 817, 821-823 (1985);  J. Ray McDermott &
Co. v. NLRB, 571 F.2d 850, 856 n.4 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 439 U.S.
839 (1978).

   /14/ The Board's decision in each case turns on an examination of
all the circumstances.  Petitioner is mistaken in its contention, Pet.
6-7, that the decision here is inconsistent with Board precedents.  In
J. H. Day Co., 204 N.L.R.B. 863 (1973), 56 out of 134 ballots were
defective and the proposed affiliation had passed by only 17 votes.
By contrast, here the outcome would be the same if none of the
composing room votes were counted.

   /15/ The Solicitor General is disqualified in this case.

   APPENDIX
