REBUTTAL TO UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND

This report addresses the "Debugging Maryland Balloting" Op Ed piece
that appeared in the Washington Post on May 12, 2002 and the
"Usability Review of the Diebold DRE System for the Four Counties in
the State of Maryland", both of which were authored by Professors Paul
S. Herrnson and Benjamin B. Bederson of the University of Maryland
College Park.

The major concern of the Maryland State Board of Elections (SBE) is
that these professors did not test the machines that the State is
putting into the hands of the voters.  The machines used by the
University of Maryland were actually still under the contractor's
ownership and control.  The machines used for testing had not yet gone
through SBE's rigorous acceptance testing process.  In addition, the
demonstration ballot had been created by the contractor, was not
sanctioned by SBE, and obviously did not meet SBE ballot standards.

This report cites the six inaccuracies that exist in the op ed piece,
in the order in which they were reported.  The underlined parts are
what are considered incorrect.

1: "The good news is that Maryland took action to avoid a disaster
such as Florida had in 2000.  At the legislature's direction, the
state and the four counties with the oldest technology-Montgomery (it
had the same punch cards that proved a disaster in Florida), Prince
Georges's Allegany and Dorchester-chipped in to buy new machines."

SBE Response: Montgomery County did not use the same punch card system
as Florida. They used the Datavote system, not a Votomatic-type card
system that was used in Florida.

2: "The system needs some reprogramming; it currently uses
inconsistent terminology that could confuse voters."

SBE Response: The State Board of Elections has developed and
established standard ballot terminology.  SBE has instituted these
standards on all ballots used on the new voting system.  SBE does not
have any information on the ballot used in the University of Maryland
"Usability Review".

3: "Help instructions are unclear and are not available throughout the
voting process.  A help button should be added."

SBE Response: The ballot standards used on the new voting system
include comprehensive text and audio instructions. A function that
will provide the ability for voters to retrieve instructions during
any point in the voting process is not available in the current
software version. SBE has requested that Diebold Elections Systems
provide this function in a future software upgrade.

4: "No warning is given for over voting, and it is unclear how voters
are to make a change once they have selected a candidate."

SBE Response: The ballot standards issued by SBE do not permit over
voting on the new voting system.  Preventing over voting is an option
in the software.  SBE does not have any information on the programming
of the ballot configuration used in the University of Maryland review.

5: "The audio version designed for the disabled is confusing and hard
to navigate."

SBE Response: Audio ballots are developed from the text-based ballots.
If the text version of the ballot that was used was unclear, then it
is likely that the audio version would also be unclear and confusing.
Again, because SBE did not develop nor approve of the ballot that was
used, SBE cannot respond further to this issue.  Furthermore, the
Diebold election system is the system preferred by the National
Federation of the Blind (NFB).

6: "On Election Day, in real polling places with a more representative
range of voters, the problems and concerns could be even greater.
That's why officials need to start now to launch a major voter
education campaign in the four counties."

SBE Response: Pursuant to the State Election Law and the SBE
regulations, SBE mandated in the December 2001 contract that Diebold
provide an extensive voter outreach program.

As of May 14, 2002, approximately 10,000 voters have used the new
voting system in a demonstration environment.  In addition 56,320
students used the new voting system in a Montgomery County high school
election in late April.  The new voting equipment has been used in
five successful elections in Prince George's and Montgomery Counties
since early March.  Allegany County has held demonstrations at one
municipal election polling location and is scheduled to conduct
demonstrations during four additional municipal elections.  Dorchester
County is demonstrating the voting units at schools, churches, and
firehouses.  A mock election is scheduled in Dorchester County on June
8, 2002.

In addition, 30 demonstrations are currently scheduled through
mid-June in Montgomery and Prince George's Counties; with additional
demonstration sessions added each week.  Please refer to SBE web site,
www.mdvotes.org, for up-to-date demonstration schedules.

This report comments on the University of Maryland review, "Usability
Review of the Diebold DRE system for Four Counties in the State of
Maryland."

The review cites problems mostly with the ballot layout that SBE has
addressed through ballot layout standards.  Additional observations of
the review cite the following specific issues:

1.Inserting card was very confusing

SBE Response: Inserting the voter access card is not confusing with
proper signage on the voting equipment.  Voter education anecdotal
evidence from actual elections indicates otherwise.

2.  Concerns about reliability

SBE Response: Pursuant to SBE regulations, a full test of each unit
must be conducted prior to acceptance and use.

3.  Colors are not well chosen

SBE Response: SBE has established ballot standards that include colors
that are easy to read and comply with the Rehabilitation Act
Amendments of 1998 (Section 508, §1194.26).

4. Font size could be bigger

SBE Response: Increased font size is available upon request of the
voter.  SBE can assume that the testing participants did not have a
working knowledge of the equipment.

5.  Layout of the ballot was confusing

SBE Response: SBE has developed a simple, straightforward ballot
standard that is receiving widespread, positive reactions from voters
that have used the equipment in elections or demonstration
environments.


May 21, 2002
