American Community Security Update
November 29, 2001

We use this service to provide you the most up-to-date 
safety and security related information we have available.  
We will continue to do so, sending out messages as soon as 
new information becomes available.

In addition to sharing security-related information, we 
will continue to include news and information about our 
American Citizens Services of a more general nature. This 
week we are including preliminary information about 
absentee voting and the 2002 elections.

If you have any suggestions for future topics, or if there 
is some aspect of our services you'd like to know more 
about, please FAX us your ideas at 03-
3224-5856.

Security Situation:

The security situation in Japan remains the same with no 
new threat information reported from either the American or 
Japanese side.  However, the embassy continues to maintain 
a heightened state of alert and encourages all Americans to 
do the same.  Alert individuals prepared for terrorist 
acts, can minimize the likelihood that these acts will be 
successfully carried out against them.  

OSAC Meeting: 

This past week the Overseas Security Advisory Council 
(OSAC) met at the embassy.  OSAC is a group of American 
businesses who send representatives (some are security 
professionals, but most are not) to discuss what they can 
do to enhance the security posture of their company.  All 
American businesses based in Japan are encouraged to join.  
Call the Embassy's Regional Security Office at (03) 3224-
5000 for more information.

Absentee Voters:

2002 Elections Start In March:  We now have less than 49 
weeks before the 2002 general election to get accurate, 
non-partisan information about registration and absentee 
balloting to the roughly 3.5 million non-Department of 
Defense Americans who reside abroad.  Overseas voters are 
eligible to vote in primary, runoff and special elections, 
in addition to the general election on Tuesday, November 5, 
2002.  Three states - California, Illinois and Texas - have 
primaries starting in March.  California's March 5th 
primary is just 13 weeks away.

The Embassy would like to reach out to a lot more of our 
fellow citizens, help them to register (maybe for the first 
time) earlier in the year and vote in the primaries as well 
as the general election.  We will try to set clear cutoff 
dates for mailing ballots back to the US by pouch or 
Military Postal System so there is no question among 
voters, and hopefully we can eliminate much of the 
traditional last-minute rush. 

We will send you additional information as the coming year 
unfolds.  The U.S. Embassy will be receiving specific 
information about registration and absentee balloting in 
coming months.  



We are not staffed to handle email inquiries at this time.
Please contact us by phone or FAX if you have questions.

------------------------------------------------------
Contact us:
------------------------------------------------------

The American Embassy in Tokyo
1-10-5 Akasaka, Minato-ku, Tokyo 107-8420
Tel: 03-3224-5174
Fax: 03-3224-5856
http://www.tokyoacs.com


