
Jim Cast
Headquarters, Washington, DC               April 22, 1999
(Phone:  202/358-1779)

Leslie A. Mathews
Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, CA
(Phone:  661/258-3893)

Dominic Amatore
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL
(Phone:  256/544-0031)

Barron Beneski
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Dulles, VA
(Phone:  703/406-5000)

NOTE TO EDITORS: N99-21

NEW X-34 SPACEPLANE TO BE UNVEILED AT DRYDEN 

    NASA will unveil a new reusable, robotic rocket plane in 
the high desert of California next week.

     The first of three X-34 demonstration vehicles will be 
"rolled out" at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, 
Edwards, CA, on Friday, April 30, opening an era of low-cost 
reusable space planes.

     The X-34, a single-engine rocket plane, will fly itself 
using onboard computers. The vehicle is approximately 58 
feet long, 28 feet wide at wing tip and 11 feet tall from 
the bottom of the fuselage to the top of the tail.  The X-34 
will launch from an L-1011 airliner and will reach altitudes 
of up to 250,000 feet and travel up to eight times faster 
than the speed of sound.

     Flights of the X-34 will test many new technologies: 
composite material structures, composite tanks and new, 
integrated avionics. The vehicle also will demonstrate the 
ability to fly through inclement weather, land horizontally 
at a designated landing site, and safely abort during 
flight. The planned 27 flights within a year will 
demonstrate the program's ability to fly within 24 hours of 
its last mission, using a small ground crew.

     The X-34 has completed ground vibration tests, ensuring 
there will be no potentially hazardous vibrations during 
flight.  The L-1011 and the X-34 prototype were tested 
separately and together at Dryden. 

     After the rollout, the X-34 will be mounted underneath 
the L-1011 and flown on "captive-carry" flights to allow the 
Federal Aviation Administration to approve modifications to 
the L-1011.  When powered flights begin for X-34, the 
demonstrator will be carried aloft and separate from the L-
1011 before igniting its rocket engine. Following the 
powered portion of flight, the unpiloted X-34 will land 
horizontally, initially on a dry lakebed and eventually on a 
runway.

     The April 30 rollout, which is open to the media, will 
air live on NASA Television. A press conference will be held 
at 1 p.m. EDT, and the rollout ceremony will take place at 2 
p.m. EDT.  For accreditation and more information, reporters 
should contact Leslie Mathews at Dryden Public Affairs on 
(661) 258-3893.  

     NASA TV is available on GE-2, transponder 9C at 85 
degrees west longitude, with vertical polarization. 
Frequency is on 3880.0 megahertz, with audio on 6.8 
megahertz. 

     In a cooperative program among NASA Centers, Dryden 
will provide flight-testing and ground vibration testing. 
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, manages 
the X-34 project.  Orbital Sciences Corporation Dulles, VA, 
is designing, developing and testing the vehicle. 

                           - end -

