James Cast
Headquarters, Washington, DC                       February 26, 1999
(Phone:  202/358-1779)

Kirsten Williams
Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, CA
(Phone:  805/258-2662)

Dominic Amatore
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL
(Phone:  256/544-0031)

Barron Beneski
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Dulles, VA
(Phone:  703/406-5000)

RELEASE:  99-28

X-34 ARRIVES AT NASA DRYDEN FOR TESTS

     The X-34 technology-testbed demonstrator, structural test 
article arrived Wednesday at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, 
Edwards, CA, for ground testing and Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) certification of its L-1011 mothership.

     The structural test article consists of the X-34's airframe.  It 
was shipped from Orbital Sciences Corporation's facilities in Dulles, 
VA, in two separate trucks -- one for the fuselage and another for 
the wing.  The first vehicle will be assembled at Dryden before 
undergoing ground vibration tests, which ensure that there are no 
potentially hazardous vibrations during flight.  The L-1011 will undergo
ground vibration tests as well, both alone and mated to the X-34.

     "We are excited to be part of the X-34 team.  We are pleased to 
be able to make a contribution to this project that adds to Dryden's 
legacy in test flight," Dryden X-34 project manager Dave Bushman said.

     Once ground tests are complete, the X-34 will make six or seven 
captive-carry flights mated to the L-1011.  This will allow the FAA 
to approve modifications made to the L-1011 to enable it to carry the 
X-34, a much larger vehicle than the L-1011's normal Pegasus Launch 
Vehicle payload. 

     Certification flights will take place in Edwards Air Force Base, 
CA, airspace with Dryden providing hangar space, fuel and control 
room facilities. 

     Once certified, a separate X-34 flight vehicle will be 
transported to the U.S. Army's White Sands Missile Range, NM, where 
the first portion of the planned 27 flight tests will be conducted.  
Once the X-34 has demonstrated safe and reliable performance at White 
Sands, the project plans to move to NASA's Kennedy Space Center, FL, 
for the remainder of the test flights.

     The X-34 is a single-engine rocket with short wings and a small 
tail surface.  The vehicle is 58.3 feet long, 27.7 feet wide at wing 
tip and 11.5 feet tall from the bottom of the fuselage to the top of 
the tail. 

     Plans call for the reusable X-34 to fly at a rate of 25 times 
per year.  The autonomously operated, suborbital aerospace vehicle 
will be air-launched from an L-1011.  Capable of flying eight times 
the speed of sound and reaching an altitude of 250,000 feet, the X-34 
will demonstrate low-cost reusability, autonomous landing, subsonic 
flights through inclement weather, safe abort conditions and landing 
in 20-knot cross winds.

     The X-34 is designed to bridge the gap between the earlier 
Clipper Graham, or DC-XA subsonic demonstrator vehicle, and the 
larger, more advanced X-33 vehicle.  The X-34 project is part of 
NASA's Office of Aero-Space Technology, which oversees NASA's efforts 
to develop the technology to dramatically reduce the cost of access 
to space. 

     Key technologies being demonstrated by the X-34 include 
composite primary and secondary airframe structures; composite 
reusable propellant tanks, cryo insulation and propulsion system 
elements; advanced Thermal Protection Systems and materials; low-cost 
avionics, including differential Global Positioning System and 
Inertial Navigation System; integrated vehicle health monitoring 
system; flush air data system; and automated vehicle checkout.  The 
X-34 also will have the potential to serve as a platform for 
demonstration of additional technologies and experiments.

     The X-34 will be powered by the Fastrac engine, which is 
currently in design and development at NASA's Marshall Space Flight 
Center, Huntsville, AL.  Fastrac is a single-stage main engine, which 
burns a mixture of liquid oxygen (LOX) and kerosene (RP-1).

     Six NASA centers, two Department of Defense installations and an 
industry team led by prime contractor Orbital Sciences Corp. are 
supporting the development and eventual flight testing of the X-34.  
The program is managed for NASA by Marshall.

			-end-

                            * * *
