This is the accessible text file for GAO report number GAO-03-143 
entitled 'Tax Administration: IRS Needs to Further Refine Its Tax 
Filing Season Performance Measures' which was released on November 22, 
2002.



This text file was formatted by the U.S. General Accounting Office 

(GAO) to be accessible to users with visual impairments, as part of a 

longer term project to improve GAO products’ accessibility. Every 

attempt has been made to maintain the structural and data integrity of 

the original printed product. Accessibility features, such as text 

descriptions of tables, consecutively numbered footnotes placed at the 

end of the file, and the text of agency comment letters, are provided 

but may not exactly duplicate the presentation or format of the printed 

version. The portable document format (PDF) file is an exact electronic 

replica of the printed version. We welcome your feedback. Please E-mail 

your comments regarding the contents or accessibility features of this 

document to Webmaster@gao.gov.



GAO Highlights:



TAX ADMINISTRATION: IRS Needs to Further Refine Its Tax Filing Season 

Performance Measures



Highlights of GAO- 03-143, a report to the Subcommittee on Oversight, 

Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives 



Why GAO Did This Study:



The tax filing season, roughly January 1 through April 15, is when 

most taxpayers file their returns, receive refunds, and call or visit 

IRS offices or the IRS Web site with questions.  To provide better 

information about the quality of filing season services, IRS is 
revamping 

its suite of filing season performance measures.  Because the new 
measures 

are part of a strategy to improve service and because filing season 

service affects so many taxpayers, GAO was asked to assess whether the 
new 

measures have the four characteristics of successful performance 
measures 

graphically depicted below.



What GAO Found:



In assessing 53 performance measures across IRS’s four program areas, 
GAO 

found that IRS has made significant efforts to improve its performance 

measurement system. Many of the measures satisfied some of the four key 

characteristics of successful performance measures established in 
earlier 

GAO work. Although improvements are ongoing, GAO identified instances 
where 

measures showed weaknesses including the following: (1) The objectivity 
and 

reliability of some measures could be improved so that they will be 
reasonably 

free from significant bias and produce the same result under similar 

circumstances. For example, survey administrators may notify Telephone 

Assistance’s customer service representatives (CSR) too soon that their 

call was selected to participate in the customer satisfaction survey, 

which could bias CSR behavior towards taxpayers and adversely affect 
the 

measure’s objectivity. In addition, the measure Electronic Filing and 

Assistance uses to determine the number of Web site hits was not 
reliable 

because it did not represent the actual number of times the Web site is 

accessed.

(2) The clarity of some performance information was affected when that 

measure’s definition and formula were not consistent.  For example, the 

definition for “CSR response level” measure is the percentage of 
callers 

who receive service from a CSR within a specified period of time, but 
the 

measure did not include callers who received a busy signal or hung up. 
(3) 

Some suites of measures did not cover governmentwide priorities such as 

quality, timeliness, and cost of service. For example, Field Assistance 

was missing measures for timeliness and cost of service.



[See PDF for image]



What GAO Recommends:



GAO is making recommendations to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue 

directed at taking actions to better ensure that IRS validates the 
accuracy 

of data collection methods for several measures; modifies the formulas 
used 

to compute various measures; and adds certain measures, such as cost of 

service, 

to its suite of measures.



Of GAO’s 18 recommendations, IRS agreed with 12 and discussed actions 
that 

had been taken or would be taken to implement them. For 2 of those 12, 
the 

actions discussed by IRS did not fully address GAO’s concerns. IRS did 
not 

agree with the other 6 recommendations.



The full report, including GAO’s objectives, scope, methodology, and 

analysis 

is available at www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-143. For additional 

information about the report, contact James White, 202-512-9110 or 

WhiteJ@gao.gov.



Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight, Committee on Ways 

and Means, House of Representatives:



United States General Accounting Office:



GAO:



November 2002:



Tax Administration:



IRS Needs to Further Refine Its Tax Filing Season Performance Measures:



Tax Filing Performance Measures:



GAO-03-143:



Contents:



Letter:



Results in Brief:



Background:



Scope and Methodology:



Filing Season Performance Measures Have Many of the Attributes of 

Successful Measures, but Further Enhancements Are Possible:



Conclusions:



Recommendations for Executive Action:



Agency Comments and Our Evaluation:



Appendix I: Expanded Explanation of Our Attributes and Methodology for 

Assessing IRS’s Performance Measures:



Appendix II: The 53 IRS Performance Measures Reviewed:



Appendix III: Comments from the Internal Revenue Service:



GAO Comments:



Appendix IV: GAO Contacts and Staff Acknowledgments:



GAO Contacts:



Acknowledgments:



Bibliography:



Related Products:



Tables:



Table 1: Key Attributes of Successful Performance Measures:



Table 2: Overview of Our Assessment of Telephone Assistance Measures:



Table 3: Overview of Our Assessment of Electronic Filing and Assistance 

Measures:



Table 4: Overview of Our Assessment of Field Assistance Measures:



Table 5: Overview of Our Assessment of Submission Processing Measures:



Table 6: Telephone Assistance Performance Measures:



Table 7: Electronic Filing and Assistance Performance Measures:



Table 8: Field Assistance Performance Measures:



Table 9: Submission Processing Performance Measures:



Figures:



Figure 1: IRS’s Mission and the Link between Its Strategic Goals and 

the Elements of Its Balanced Measurement System:



Figure 2: Linkage from IRS Mission to Operating Unit Measure and 

Target:



Figure 3: Performance Measures Should Have Four Characteristics:



Figure 4: Example of Relationship among Field Assistance Goals and 

Measures:



Abbreviations:



CQRS: Centralized Quality Review Site:



CSR: customer service representative:



GPRA: Government Performance and Results Act of 1993:



IRS: Internal Revenue Service:



Q-Matic: Queuing Management System:



TAC: Taxpayer Assistance Center:



W&I: Wage and Investment:



United States General Accounting Office:



Washington, DC 20548:



November 22, 2002:



The Honorable Amo Houghton

Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight

Committee on Ways and Means

House of Representatives:



Dear Mr. Chairman:



For most taxpayers, their only contacts with the Internal Revenue 

Service (IRS) are associated with the filing of their individual income 

tax returns. Most taxpayers file their returns between January 1 and 

April 15, which is generally referred to as the “filing season.”

[Footnote 1] In addition to the filing itself, which can be on 

paper or electronic, these contacts generally involve millions of 

taxpayers seeking help from IRS by calling one of IRS’s toll-free 

telephone numbers, visiting one of IRS’s field assistance centers, or 

accessing IRS’s Web site on the Internet (www.irs.gov). Between January 

1 and July 13, 2002, for example, IRS received about 105 million calls 

for assistance over its toll-free telephone lines.[Footnote 2]



As part of a much larger effort to modernize and become more responsive 

to taxpayers, IRS is revamping how it measures and reports its filing 

season performance. The new filing season performance measures are to 

balance customer satisfaction, employee satisfaction, and business 

results, such as the quality of answers to taxpayer inquiries and the 

timeliness of refund issuance. IRS intends to use the balanced measures 

to make managers and frontline staff more accountable for improving 

filing season performance.



Because so many taxpayers are affected by IRS’s performance during the 

filing season and because the revamped measures are part of a strategy 

to improve performance, you asked us to review IRS’s new set of filing 

season performance measures. Those measures belong to the four program 

areas critical to a successful filing season: telephone assistance; 

electronic filing and assistance; field assistance; and the processing 

of returns, refunds, and remittances (referred to as “submission 

processing”). Specifically, our objective was to assess whether the key 

performance measures IRS uses to hold managers accountable in the four 

program areas had the characteristics of a successful performance 

measurement system.



Previous GAO work indicated agencies successful in measuring 

performance had performance measures that demonstrate results, are 

limited to the vital few, cover multiple priorities, and provide useful 

information for decision making.[Footnote 3] To determine whether IRS’s 

filing season performance measures satisfy these four general 

characteristics, we assessed the measures using nine specific 

attributes.[Footnote 4] Earlier GAO work cited these specific 

attributes as key to successful performance measures. Table 1 is a 

summary of the nine attributes, including the potentially adverse 

consequences if they are missing. All attributes are not equal and 

failure to have a particular attribute does not necessarily indicate 

that there is a weakness in that area or that the measure is not 

useful; rather, it may indicate an opportunity for further refinement. 

An expanded explanation of the nine attributes is included in appendix 

I.



Table 1: Key Attributes of Successful Performance Measures:



[See PDF for image]



Source: Summary of information in appendix I.



[End of table]



We shared these attributes with various IRS officials, who generally 

agreed with their relevance. As discussed in greater detail in the 

separate scope and methodology section of this report, we took many 

steps to validate and ensure consistency in our application of the 

attributes.



We testified before the Subcommittee on Oversight on some of the 

interim results of our assessment in April 2002.[Footnote 5]



Results in Brief:



In assessing 53 performance measures across four of IRS’s key filing 

season program areas, we found that the measures satisfied many of the 

nine attributes of successful performance measures previously listed in 

table 1. As part of its agencywide reorganization, IRS has made 

significant efforts to improve its performance measurement system, 

which is to provide useful information about how well IRS performed in 

achieving its goals. The improvement of this system is an ongoing 

process where, in some cases, IRS is only beginning to collect baseline 

information on which to form targets and develop other measures that 

would provide better information to evaluate performance results. 

Despite IRS’s progress, we identified instances in all four program 

areas where the individual measures or suites of measures did not meet 

some of our nine attributes. Some of these instances represent 

opportunities for IRS to further refine its measures.



All of the 15 telephone assistance measures had some of the attributes 

of successful performance measures. Of the more significant problems, 

five measures had either clarity or reliability problems and one had an 

objectivity problem. For example,



* five measures did not provide managers and other stakeholders with 

clear information about the program’s performance. For example, the 

definition for “customer service representative (CSR) response level” 

is the percentage of callers who receive service from a CSR within a 

specified period of time, but the formula did not include callers who 

received a busy signal or hung up; this limitation could lead managers 

and other stakeholders to conclude that IRS is providing significantly 

better service than it is.



All of the 13 electronic filing and assistance performance measures 

fulfilled some of the 9 attributes. The most significant problems 

involved changing targets, objectivity, and missing measures. For 

example,



* electronic filing and assistance changed the targets for two of its 

measures during fiscal year 2001, which could distort the assessment of 

performance because what was to be observed changed. For example, it 

changed the target for the “number of 1040 series returns filed 

electronically” from 42 million to 40 million because midyear data 

indicated that 42 million 1040 series returns were not going to be 

filed electronically. Because of the subjective considerations 

involved, changing the target in this situation also affected the 

measure’s objectivity.



All of field assistance’s 14 performance measures satisfied some of the 

attributes. Many of the more important problems involved clarity and 

reliability. In addition, some measures were missing, which could cause 

an emphasis on some program goals at the expense of a balance among all 

goals. For example,



* the methods used to track workload volume and staff hours expended 

required manual input that is subject to errors and inconsistencies, 

which could affect data accuracy and thus the reliability of 8 of field 

assistance’s 14 measures.



* Field assistance did not have timeliness, efficiency, or cost of 

service measures.



Many of the 11 submission processing measures had the attributes of 

successful performance measures. Some of the more significant problems 

related to clarity and reliability. For example,



* one measure--”productivity”--was unclear because it is a compilation 

of different types of work IRS performs in processing returns, 

remittances, and refunds and issuing notices and letters. Managers told 

us that they needed specific information related to their own 

operations and that the measure’s methodology was difficult to 

understand.



In all four program areas, we were unable, because of documentation 

limitations, to verify the linkages among IRS’s goals and measures. 

Among other things, such linkages provide managers and staff with a 

road map that shows how their day-to-day activities contribute to 

attaining agencywide goals.



We are making recommendations to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue 

directed at taking actions to better ensure that IRS’s filing season 

measures have the four characteristics of successful performance 

measures. For example, we are recommending that IRS modify the formulas 

used to compute various measures; validate the accuracy of data 

collection methods for several measures; and add certain measures such 

as cost of service, to its suite of measures.



We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Commissioner 

of Internal Revenue. We received written comments, which are reprinted 

in appendix III. In his comments, the Commissioner agreed that there 

were opportunities to refine some performance measures and said that 

our observation about the ongoing nature of the performance measurement 

process was on target. The Commissioner agreed with 12 of our 18 

recommendations and discussed actions that had been taken or would be 

taken to implement them. In 2 of those cases, the actions discussed by 

IRS did not fully address our concerns. The Commissioner disagreed with 

the other 6 recommendations. We discuss the Commissioner’s comments in 

the “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section of the report.



Background:



In keeping with the Government Performance and Results Act of 

1993 (GPRA),[Footnote 6] IRS revamped its set of filing season 

performance measures as part of a massive, ongoing modernization 

effort. Congress mandated the modernization effort in the IRS 

Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998[Footnote 7] and intended that IRS 

would better balance service to taxpayers with enforcement of the tax 

laws. To implement the modernization mandate, the Commissioner of 

Internal Revenue developed a strategy composed of five interdependent 

components. One of those components is the development of balanced 

performance measures.[Footnote 8]



Balanced measures are to emphasize accountability for achieving 

specific results and to reflect IRS’s priorities, which are articulated 

in its mission and its three strategic goals--top quality service to 

all taxpayers through fair and uniform application of the law, top 

quality service to each taxpayer in every interaction, and productivity 

through a quality work environment. IRS has defined three elements of 

balanced measures--(1) customer satisfaction, (2) employee 
satisfaction, 

and (3) business results (quality and quantity measures)--to ensure 
balance 

among its priorities. Figure 1 shows IRS’s mission and the link between 
its 

strategic goals and the three elements of IRS’s balanced measurement 

system.



Figure 1: IRS’s Mission and the Link between Its Strategic Goals and 

the Elements of Its Balanced Measurement System:



[See PDF for image]



Source: GAO depiction of information in IRS Publication 3561 and IRS’s 

Progress Report (December 2001).



[End of figure]



IRS intends to use the balanced measures to make managers and frontline 

staff more accountable for improving filing season performance. We 

reviewed the performance measures in the four programs areas that 

interact with taxpayers the most during the filing season--telephone 

assistance, electronic filing and assistance, field assistance, and 

submission processing. Each of these program areas is part of IRS’s 

Wage and Investment (W&I) operating division, which generally serves 

taxpayers whose only income is from wages and investments.[Footnote 9] 

Although IRS had measures of performance prior to the reorganization, 

IRS managers have spent much effort to revamp the filing season 

performance measures since that time.



An important aspect of IRS’s progress in the challenging task of 

improving its performance measures was the development of a new 

Strategic Planning, Budgeting, and Performance Management process in 

2000. As part of that process, IRS prepares an annual Strategy and 

Program Plan that communicates some of the various levels of IRS’s 

goals (e.g., strategic goals, operating division goals) and many 

performance measures.[Footnote 10] Although the Strategy and Program 

Plan does not document all the linkages among the various goals and 

performance measures, figure 2 is an example we developed to 

demonstrate the complete relationship from the agency level mission 

down to the operating unit’s measures and targets.



Figure 2: Linkage from IRS Mission to Operating Unit Measure and 

Target:



[See PDF for image]



Source: GAO Analysis of IRS’s Strategy and Program Plan (October 29, 

2001), the W&I Business Performance Review (January 2002), IRS’s 

Progress Report (December 2001) and IRS Publication 3561.



[End of figure]



The Strategy and Program Plan is an important document because the 

Commissioner holds IRS managers accountable for the results of the 

performance measures contained within it. In addition, many of the 

measures within the document are presented to outside stakeholders, 

such as Congress and the public, as key indicators of IRS’s 

performance. The Strategy and Program Plan is the source of the 53 

measures we reviewed in the four programs.



As we discussed in our June 1996 guide on implementing GPRA,[Footnote 

11] agencies that were successful in measuring performance strived to 

establish performance measures that were based on four general 

characteristics. Those four characteristics are shown in figure 3 as 

applicable to the four filing season programs we reviewed and are 

described in more detail following the figure.



Figure 3: Performance Measures Should Have Four Characteristics:



[See PDF for image]



Source: GAO.



[End of figure]



Demonstrate results. Performance measures should show an organization’s 

progress towards achieving an intended level of performance or results. 

Specifically, performance goals establish intended performance, and 

measures can be used to assess progress towards achieving those goals.



Be limited to the vital few. Limiting measures to core program 

activities enables managers and other stakeholders to assess 

accomplishments, make decisions, realign processes, and assign 

accountability without having an excess of data that could obscure 

rather than clarify performance issues.



Cover multiple priorities. Performance measures should cover many 

governmentwide priorities, such as quality, timeliness, cost of 

service, customer satisfaction, employee satisfaction, and outcomes. 

Performance measurement systems need to include incentives for managers 

to strike the difficult balance among competing interests. One or two 

priorities should not be overemphasized at the expense of others. IRS’s 

history shows why this balance is important. Because of its emphasis on 

achieving certain numeric targets, such as the amount of dollars 

collected, IRS failed to adequately consider other priorities, such as 

the fair treatment of taxpayers.



Provide Useful Information for Decision Making. Performance measures 

should provide managers and other stakeholders timely, action-oriented 

information in a format that helps them make decisions that improve 

program performance. Measures that do not provide managers with useful 

information will not alert managers and other stakeholders to the 

existence of problems nor help them respond when problems arise.



On the basis of these four characteristics of successful performance 

measures, we used various performance management literature to develop 

a set of nine specific attributes that we used as criteria for 

assessing IRS’s filing season performance measures. The nine attributes 

are linkage, clarity, measurable target, objectivity, reliability, core 

program activities, limited overlap, balance, and governmentwide 

priorities. Appendix I describes these attributes in more detail.



Scope and Methodology:



As previously mentioned, we focused our work on four key filing season 

programs--telephone assistance, electronic filing and assistance, 

field assistance, and submission processing--within W&I. IRS officials 

identified the performance measures in the Strategy and Program Plan to 

be the highest, most comprehensive level of measures for which they are 

accountable. After discussions with IRS, we decided to review all

53 measures in the Strategy and Program Plan relating to the four 

filing season programs. We used W&I’s draft fiscal year 2001 - 2003 

Strategy and Program Plan (dated July 25, 2001) to conduct our review 

and updated relevant information with the final plan (dated October 29, 

2001). Appendix II describes each measure we reviewed in the four 

program areas and provides other relevant information, such as targets 

and potential weaknesses.



Our review focused on whether IRS’s new set of filing season 

performance measures had the characteristics of a successful 

performance measurement system (i.e., demonstrated results, were 

limited to the vital few, covered multiple priorities, and provided 

useful information for decision making). For use as criteria in 

assessing the measures, and as detailed in appendix I, we identified 

nine attributes of performance measures from various sources, such as 

earlier GAO work, Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-

11,[Footnote 12] GPRA, and IRS’s handbook on Managing Statistics in a 

Balanced Measures System.[Footnote 13] We shared our attributes with 

IRS officials from various organizations that have a role in developing 

or monitoring performance measures. Those units included IRS’s 

Organizational Performance Division and several W&I units, such as 

Strategy and Finance; Planning and Analysis; Customer Account Services; 

and Communications, Assistance, Research, and Education. Officials in 

these units generally agreed with the relevance of our attributes and 

our assessment approach.



We applied the 9 attributes to the 53 filing season measures in a 

systematic manner, but some judgment was required. To ensure 

consistency and reliability in our application of the attributes, we 

had one staff person responsible for each of the four areas. That staff 

person prepared the initial analysis and at least two other staff 

reviewed those detailed results. Several staff reviewed the results for 

all four areas. We did not do a detailed assessment of IRS’s 

methodology for calculating the measures, but looked only at 

methodological issues as necessary to assess whether a particular 

measure met the overall characteristics of a successful performance 

measure.



In applying the attributes, we analyzed numerous pieces of 

documentation, such as IRS’s Congressional Budget Justification, Annual 

Performance Plan, and data dictionary,[Footnote 14] and many other 

reports and documents dealing with the four IRS programs, goals, 

performance measures, and improvement initiatives. We interviewed IRS 

officials at various levels within telephone assistance, electronic 

filing and assistance, field assistance, and submission processing to 

understand the measures, their methodology, and their relationship to 

goals, among other things. We also interviewed officials from various 

IRS organizations that are involved in managing, collecting, and/or 

using performance data, such as the Organizational Performance 

Division; Strategy and Finance; Customer Account Services; Statistics 

of Income; and the Centralized Quality Review Site; and a 

representative of an IRS contractor, Pacific Consulting Group, 

responsible for analyzing and reporting the results of telephone 

assistance’s customer satisfaction survey. Appendix I provides more 

detail on the nine attributes we used, including explanations and 

examples of each attribute and information on our methodology for 

assessing each attribute.



We conducted our review in Atlanta, Ga; Washington, D.C; Cincinnati, 

Ohio; and Memphis, Tenn. from September 2001 to September 2002 in 

accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.



Filing Season Performance Measures Have Many of the Attributes of 

Successful Measures, but Further Enhancements Are Possible:



The 53 filing season performance measures included in our review have 

many of the attributes of successful performance measures, as detailed 

in appendix I. For example, in all four of the program areas we 

reviewed, most measures covered the core activities of each program and 

had targets in place. In addition, IRS had several on-going initiatives 

aimed at improving its measures, such as telephone assistance’s efforts 

to revamp all aspects of its quality measures.



At the same time, however, the measures did not satisfy all the 

attributes, indicating the potential for further enhancements. The nine 

attributes we used to assess each measure are not equal and failure to 

have a particular attribute does not necessarily indicate that there is 

a weakness in that area. In some cases, for example, a measure may not 

have a particular attribute because benchmarking data are being 

collected or a measure is being revised. Likewise, a noted weakness, 

such as a measure not having clarity or being reliable, does not mean 

that the measure is not useful. For example, telephone assistance’s 

“CSR level of service” measure does not meet our clarity attribute 

because its name and definition indicate that only calls answered by 

CSRs are included, but its formula includes some calls answered by 

automation. This defect currently does not impair the measure’s 

usefulness because the number of automated calls is fairly 

insignificant. Other weaknesses, however, could lead managers or other 

stakeholders to draw the wrong conclusions, overlook the existence of 

problems, or delay resolving problems. For example, electronic filing 

and assistance’s “number of IRS digital daily Web site hits” measure 

was not considered clear or reliable because it systematically 

overstates the number of times the Web site is accessed. In total, 

therefore, the weaknesses identified should be considered areas for 

further refinement. Such refinements are not expected to be costly or 

involve significant additional effort on the part of IRS because in 

many instances our recommendations only include modifications or 

increased rigor to procedures or processes already in place.



The rest of this report discusses the results of our analysis for each 

of the four program areas--telephone assistance, electronic filing and 

assistance, field assistance, and submission processing.



Telephone Assistance Measures:



As shown in table 2, all 15 of IRS’s telephone performance measures 

have some of the attributes of successful performance 

measures.[Footnote 15] However, as summarized in this section, the 

measures have several shortcomings. For example, we identified 

opportunities to improve the clarity of five measures and the 

reliability of five other measures. Table 6 in appendix II has more 

detailed information about each telephone measure, including any 

weaknesses we identified and any recommendations for improvement.



Table 2: Overview of Our Assessment of Telephone Assistance Measures:



[See PDF for image]



Note: A check mark denotes that the measure has the attribute.



[A] We were unable to verify the linkages between goals and measures 

because of insufficient documentation.



[B] Core program activities of telephone assistance are to provide 

timely and accurate assistance to taxpayers with inquiries about the 

tax law and their accounts.



[C] IRS also refers to CSRs as assistors.



[D] IRS considers that these measures are balanced because they address 

priorities, such as customer and employee satisfaction and business 

results. However, including measures, such as cost of service, could 

improve the balance of telephone assistance’s program priorities.



Source: GAO analysis.



[End of table]



No Documentation Shows the Complete Linkage between Agencywide Goals 

and Telephone Measures:



Although telephone assistance management stated that their goals and 

measures generally aligned, we were unable to verify this because no 

documentation shows the complete relationship. For example, some 

documentation may show a link from a measure to an agencywide goal, but 

the operating division level goals were omitted. When we attempted to 

create the linkage ourselves, we found it difficult to determine how 

some measures related to the different agencywide and operating 

division goals. When we asked some IRS officials to describe the 

complete link, they too had a difficult time and were uncertain of some 

connections.



Telephone assistance managers stated that staff received performance 

management training that should help them to understand their role in 

helping the organization achieve its goals. However, having clear and 

complete documentation would provide evidence that linkages exist and 

help prevent misunderstandings. When employees do not understand the 

relationship between goals and measures, they may not understand how 

their work contributes to agencywide efforts and, thus, goals may not 

be achieved.



Most Telephone Measures Have Clarity:



Ten of the 15 measures have clarity (e.g., “automated calls answered” 

clearly describes the count of all toll-free calls answered at customer 

service sites by automated service). However, five measures contain or 

omit certain data elements that can cause managers or other 

stakeholders to misunderstand the level of performance. For example, 

the “CSR response level,” is defined as the percentage of callers who 

started receiving service from a CSR within a specified period of time. 

However, this may not reflect the real customer experience at IRS 

because the formula for computing the measure does not include callers 

who tried to reach a CSR but did not, such as callers who (1) hung up 

while waiting to speak to a CSR, (2) were provided access only to 

automated services and hung-up, and (3) received a busy 

signal.[Footnote 16] (The other four measures, as noted in table 6 in 

appendix II, are “CSR level of service,” “automated completion rate,” 

“CSR service provided,” and “toll-free customer satisfaction.”):



Measures that do not provide clear information about program 

performance may affect the validity of managers’ and stakeholders’ 

assessments of IRS’s performance, possibly leading to a 

misinterpretation of results or a failure to take proper action to 

resolve performance problems.



Most Telephone Measures Have Targets:



Eleven of the 15 measures have numerical targets that facilitate the 

future assessment of whether overall goals and objectives were 

achieved. Of the four measures with no targets, three were measures for 

which IRS was collecting data for use in developing first-time targets 

and one was a measure (“automated completion rate”) that IRS was no 

longer tracking in the Strategy and Program Plan. Although we generally 

disagree with the removal of the “automated completion rate” measure 

from the Strategy and Program Plan, as described in an upcoming 

section, not having targets in these instances is reasonable.



Data Collection Methods for Telephone Assistance’s Customer 

Satisfaction Measure Are Not Always Objective:



IRS determines customer satisfaction with its toll-free telephone 

assistance through a survey administered to taxpayers who speak with a 

CSR.[Footnote 17] We observed survey collection methods in Atlanta that 

were not always objective; that is, the administrators did not always 

follow prescribed procedures for selecting calls to participate in the 

survey. Not following prescribed procedures produces a systematic bias 

that could compromise the randomness of the sample. Also, IRS 

procedures do not require that administrators listen to the entire 

call. Although administrators are instructed to notify the CSR towards 

the end of a call that the call was selected for the survey, this may 

not occur. If an administrator begins listening to a call after it has 

started, it can be difficult to determine the full nature of the 

taxpayer’s question and thus whether the conversation is about to end. 

As a result, an administrator could prematurely notify a CSR that the 

call was selected for the survey, which could change the CSR’s behavior 

towards the taxpayer and affect the results of the survey and the 

measure. In addition, administrators may not be able to correctly 

answer certain questions on the survey, which could impair any analysis 

of those answers. We discussed these issues with a representative of 

the IRS contractor (Pacific Consulting Group) responsible for analyzing 

and reporting the survey results who said that (1) he was aware of 

these problems and (2) the same problems existed at other locations.



IRS has taken corrective action on one of these weaknesses. Because 

management decided that the procedures for selecting calls to 

participate in the customer satisfaction survey were too difficult to 

follow, it revised them. Sites began using the revised sampling 

procedures in July 2002.



Reliability of Five Telephone Quality Measures Is Suspect:



The reliability of telephone assistance’s five quality measures (“toll-

free tax law quality,” “toll-free accounts quality,” “toll-free tax law 

correct response rate,” “toll-free account correct response rate,” and 

“toll-free timeliness”) is suspect because of potential inconsistencies 

in data collection that arise due to differences among individual 

reviewer’s judgment and perceptions.[Footnote 18] Although it is not 

certain how much variation among reviewers exists, errors could occur 

throughout data collection and could affect the results of the measures 

and conclusions about the extent to which performance goals have been 

achieved.



Reliability and credibility increase when performance data are checked 

or tested for significant errors. IRS has conducted consistency reviews 

in the past and found problems. It has taken steps to improve 

consistency, the most important of which was the establishment of the 

Centralized Quality Review Site (CQRS).[Footnote 19] Among other 

controls within CQRS that are designed to enhance consistency, 

reviewers are to receive the same training and gather to discuss cases 

where the guidance is not clear. IRS has conducted one review to 

determine the effectiveness of CQRS and its efforts to improve 

consistency since IRS’s October 2000 reorganization and continues to 

find some problems.



At the time of our review, IRS was reviewing the five quality measures 

as part of an ongoing improvement initiative. Since that time, it 

redesigned many aspects of the measures, including what is measured, 

how the measures are calculated, how data are collected, and how people 

are held accountable for quality.[Footnote 20] Changes emanating from 

this initiative may further enhance consistency.



Telephone Measures Cover Core Program Activities:



Telephone assistance’s core program activities are to provide timely 

and accurate assistance to taxpayers with inquiries about the tax law 

and their accounts. IRS has at least one measure that directly 

addresses each of these core activities. For example, “toll-free 

accounts quality” is a measure that shows the percentage of accurate 

responses to taxpayers’ account related questions.



Some Overlap Exists between Telephone Assistance Measures:



The amount of overlap that exists between measures is a managerial 

decision. Of the 15 telephone measures we reviewed, 10 have at least 

partial overlap. For example, both the “CSR response level” and 

“average speed of answer” measures attempt to show how long a taxpayer 

waited before receiving service, except that the former shows the 

number of taxpayers receiving service within 30 seconds while the 

latter shows the average wait time for all taxpayers. (Table 6 in 

appendix II has information on other overlapping measures.):



IRS officials said that overlapping measures can add value to 

management’s decision-making process because each measure provides a 

nuance that can be missed if both measures were not present. For 

example, the “CSR calls answered” measure shows the number of taxpayer 

calls answered while the “CSR services provided” measure attempts to 

account for situations in which more than one CSR was involved in 

handling a single call. At the same time, however, overlapping measures 

(1) leave managers to sift through redundant, sometimes costly, 

information to determine goal achievement and (2) could confuse outside 

stakeholders, such as Congress.



Although we are not suggesting that IRS stop tracking or reporting any 

of the overlapping measures, we question whether IRS has limited the 

telephone measures included in the Strategy and Program Plan to the 

vital few. Telephone officials agreed with this assessment and stated 

that some of the overlapping measures will be removed from future 

Strategy and Program Plans.



Telephone Measures Do Not Fully Cover Governmentwide Priorities:



When considering governmentwide priorities, such as quality, 

timeliness, cost of service, and customer and employee satisfaction, 

telephone assistance is missing two measures--(1) cost of service and 

(2) a measure of customer satisfaction for automated services, as 

described below.



* Cost of Service. According to key legislation[Footnote 21] and 

accounting standards,[Footnote 22] agencies should develop and report 

cost information. Besides showing financial accountability in the use 

of taxpayer dollars, the cost information called for can be used for 

various purposes, such as authorizing and modifying programs and 

evaluating program performance. IRS does not report the average cost to 

answer a taxpayer’s inquiry by telephone. A cost-per-call analysis 

could provide a link between program goals and costs, as required by 

GPRA, and help IRS management and Congress decide about future 

investments in telephone assistance. IRS officials said they would like 

to develop a cost of services measures and are trying to determine what 

information would be meaningful to include or exclude in the 

calculation.



* Customer Satisfaction for Automated Services. Although IRS 

projections show that about 70 percent of its fiscal year 2002 calls 

would be handled by automation, it has no survey mechanism in place to 

determine taxpayers’ satisfaction with these automated services. IRS 

officials agreed this would be a meaningful measure and want to develop 

one for the future, but no implementation plans have been established.



Also, as previously mentioned, IRS has removed the “automated 

completion rate” measure from its Strategy and Program Plan. We 

realize, as noted in table 6 in appendix II, that this measure has 

limitations that need to be addressed. However, because such a large 

percentage of calls are handled by automation and because IRS plans to 

serve even more calls with automation in the future, re-inclusion of 

that measure in the Strategy and Program Plan may be warranted if the 

associated problems can be resolved.



Telephone Measures Are Balanced:



Telephone assistance has measures in place for customer satisfaction, 

employee satisfaction, and business results and, therefore, IRS 

considers the measures balanced. However, including other measures, 

such as a cost of service measure, as previously described, could 

further enhance the balance of program priorities.



Electronic Filing and Assistance Measures:



As shown in table 3, all 13 of electronic filing and assistance’s 

performance measures have some of the attributes of successful 

performance measures. However, as summarized in this section, the 

measures have some shortcomings. For example, several of the measures 

had some overlap and two measures had shortcomings related to the 

changing of targets during the fiscal year. Table 7 in appendix II has 

more detailed information about each electronic filing and assistance 

measure, including any weaknesses we identified and any recommendations 

for improvement.



Table 3: Overview of Our Assessment of Electronic Filing and Assistance 

Measures:



[See PDF for image]



Note: A check mark denotes that the measure has the attribute.



[A] We were unable to verify the linkages between goals and measures 

because of insufficient documentation.



[B] Electronic filing and assistance’s core program activities are to 

provide individual and business taxpayers with the capability to 

transact and communicate electronically with IRS.



[C] Electronic filing and assistance measures address most 

governmentwide priorities, such as quantity, customer satisfaction, and 

employee satisfaction; however, they do not cover two important 

priorities--quality and cost of service.



Source: GAO analysis.



[End of table]



Overall Alignment of Electronic Filing and Assistance’s Goals and 

Measures Not Fully Documented:



Electronic filing and assistance’s 13 performance measures are aligned 

with IRS’s overall mission and IRS’s strategic goals. However, we were 

unable to validate whether the lower level goals, such as electronic 

filing and assistance’s operational goals and improvement projects, are 

linked to the agencywide strategic level goals and operating division 

performance measures because there is not complete documentation 

available to show that linkage.



Electronic filing and assistance’s managers stated that goals and 

measures generally align and that employee briefings were held to 

communicate their goals to the organization. It is essential that all 

staff be familiar with IRS’s mission and goals, electronic filing and 

assistance’s goals and performance measures, and how electronic filing 

and assistance determines whether it is achieving its goals so that 

staff know how their day-to-day activities contribute to the goals and 

IRS’s overall mission. When this is lacking, priorities may not be 

clear and staff efforts may not be tied to goal achievement.



Most Electronic Filing and Assistance Measures Have Clarity:



All but one of electronic filing and assistance’s 13 performance 

measures had clarity. The “number of IRS digital daily Web site hits” 

measure, which is defined as the number of “hits” to IRS’s Web site, is 

not clear because its formula counts multiple hits every time a user 

accesses the site’s home page and counts a hit every time a user moves 

to another page on the Web site. The formula is not consistent with the 

definition because it does not represent the actual number of times the 

Web site is accessed.



In its fiscal year 2003 Annual Performance Plan,[Footnote 23] IRS 

acknowledged limitations with this measure as follows.



“..changes in the IRS Web design may cause a decrease in the 

number of ‘hits’ recorded in both [fiscal years] 2002 and 2003. This 

decrease will be due to improved Web site navigation and search 

functions, which may reduce the amount of random exploration by users 

to find content. The decrease will also be due to better design of the 

Web pages themselves that will reduce the number of graphics and other 

items that are used to create the Web page, all of which are counted as 

‘hits’ when a page is accessed.”:



In our report on IRS’s 2001 tax filing season, we recommended that IRS 

either discontinue the use of “hits” as a measure of the performance of 

its Web site or revise the way “hits” are calculated so that the 

measure more accurately reflects usage.[Footnote 24] IRS responded that 

it should continue to count “hits” as a measure of the Web site’s 

performance because “hits” indicate site traffic and can be used to 

measure system performance and estimate system needs. However, 

officials stated that they could improve their method of counting 

“hits” once they had implemented a more sophisticated, comprehensive 

Web analytical program. According to electronic filing and assistance 

officials, IRS introduced its redesigned Web site in January 2001 and 

implemented a new analytical program, but “hits” are still being 

calculated the same way.



Two Electronic Filing and Assistance Measures Had Targets Changed and 

Lack Objectivity:



Electronic filing and assistance changed the targets for two measures-

-”number of 1040 series returns filed electronically”[Footnote 25] and 

“total number of returns electronically filed”--during fiscal year 

2001. Changing targets could distort the assessment of performance 

because what was to be observed changed. No major event (such as 

legislation that affected the ability of many taxpayers to file 

electronically) happened that warranted changing the targets in the 

strategic plan. Instead, electronic filing and assistance changed the 

target for the first of those measures from 

42 million returns to 40 million returns because IRS’s Research 

Division’s midyear data indicated that 42 million 1040 series returns 

were not going to be filed electronically. Because the number of 1040 

series returns filed electronically is a subset of the total number of 

returns filed electronically, electronic filing and assistance also 

reduced the target for total electronic filings. Because of these 

subjective considerations, changing the targets in this situation also 

affected the objectivity of these measures.



Electronic Filing and Assistance Measures Are Reliable, with One 

Exception:



Of electronic filing and assistance’s 13 performance measures, we 

considered 12 to be reliable because the data on performance comes from 

sources, such as IRS’s masterfile[Footnote 26] and computer program 

runs, that are subject to validity checks. The one measure we did not 

consider reliable was the “number of IRS digital daily Web site hits,” 

because it does not represent the actual number of times the Web site 

is accessed, as previously described.



Measures Cover Electronic Filing and Assistance’s Core Program 

Activities:



Electronic filing and assistance’s core program activities are to 

provide individual and business taxpayers the capability to transact 

and communicate electronically with IRS. Electronic filing and 

assistance focuses on taxpayers’ ability to file their returns, pay 

their taxes, receive assistance, and obtain information electronically. 

These core activities are all covered by the 13 performance measures.



Overlap Exists among Electronic Filing and Assistance Measures:



Seven of the 13 electronic filing and assistance measures had partial 

overlap. For example, the “number of 1040 series returns electronically 

filed” and “percent of individual returns electronically filed” 

measures provide related information on a key program activity. The 

difference is that the former is a count of the number filed 

electronically while the latter is the percentage of total individual 

tax returns filed electronically. (Table 7 in appendix II has 

information on other overlapping electronic filing and assistance 

measures.):



The amount of overlap to tolerate among measures is management’s 

judgment. Electronic filing and assistance officials told us that each 

of the overlapping measures we identified provides additional 

information to managers. For example, the “number of 1040 series 

returns electronically filed” provides managers with information on the 

size of the electronic return workload whereas the “percent of 

individual returns electronically filed” tells them how they are doing 

in relation to IRS’s long-term strategic goal of 80 percent. IRS 

officials also pointed out that both number and percent performance 

measures exist because external customers, such as the press, like to 

use the measures for reporting purposes.



Electronic Filing and Assistance’s Measures Do Not Cover Some 

Governmentwide Priorities, Thus Hindering Balance:



Although electronic filing and assistance’s measures address several 

governmentwide priorities, such as quantity, customer satisfaction, and 

employee satisfaction, they do not cover two important priorities--

quality and cost of service. As a result, its performance measurement 

system is not fully balanced.



Electronic filing and assistance classifies four of its performance 

measures as quality measures, but the measures are merely counts of 

certain types of electronic transactions (such as “number of payments 

received electronically”). On the other hand, it tracks what we 

consider to be quality measures (i.e., “processing accuracy”[Footnote 

27] and “refund timeliness, electronically filed”)[Footnote 28] but 

those measures are not in the Strategy and Program Plan. These quality 

measures and others, such as one that tracks the number of electronic 

returns rejected,[Footnote 29] could be important indicators of program 

success or failure. For example, IRS data indicate that many electronic 

tax returns are rejected; a measure that captures the volume of rejects 

could help to focus management’s attention on the cause of those 

rejects.



Also, similar to our discussion of a cost of service measure in the 

telephone section, a “cost-per-electronically filed return” could 

provide a link between program goals and costs, as required by GPRA, 

and help IRS management and Congress decide about future investments in 

electronic filing and assistance.



Field Assistance Measures:



As shown in table 4, all 14 of field assistance’s performance measures 

have some of the attributes of successful performance measures. 

However, as summarized in this section, the measures have several 

shortcomings, primarily with respect to clarity, reliability, and 

balance. Table 8 in appendix II has more detailed information about 

each field assistance measure, including any weaknesses we identified 

and any recommendations for improvement.



Table 4: Overview of Our Assessment of Field Assistance Measures:



[See PDF for image]



Note: A check mark denotes that the measure has the attribute.



[A] We were unable to verify the linkages between goals and measures 

because of insufficient documentation.



[B] Core program activities of field assistance are to provide face-to-

face assistance, education, and compliance services.



[C] Although field assistance continues to develop its suite of 

performance measures, important measures of timeliness, efficiency or 

productivity, and cost of service are missing and impair balance.



Source: GAO analysis.



[End of table]



Relationship between Goals and Field Assistance Measures Not Complete:



Field assistance recognizes the importance of creating a clear 

relationship between goals and measures and has developed a template 

that shows some of that relationship. Figure 4 is an excerpt of the 

template, with the completed portions, as of October 2002, shown in 

gray.



Figure 4: Example of Relationship among Field Assistance Goals and 

Measures:



[See PDF for image]



Source: GAO’s analysis of field assistance’s business plan template.



[End of figure]



Although the template demonstrates a noteworthy effort to show a clear 

link between goals and measures, it omits the link to IRS’s mission, 

IRS’s strategic goals, and field assistance’s improvement projects. 

These links are important because they serve as the bridge between 

long-term strategic goals and short-term daily operational goals, which 

can, among other things, be used for holding IRS and the field 

assistance program accountable for achieving those goals. Also, 

officials told us that the completed template would only cite the type 

of performance measure--employee satisfaction, customer satisfaction, 

or business results--not the specific measure and target. The link to 

the specific measure provides additional information needed to clearly 

communicate the alignment of goals and measures throughout the agency, 

and the target communicates the level of performance the operating 

division hopes to achieve.



Many Field Assistance Measures Lack Clarity:



Many of field assistance’s measures lack clarity. For example, the 

“geographic coverage” measure is unclear, even to IRS officials, 

because it is not evident by its name or definition what is or is not 

included in the measure’s formula. Specifically, officials debated 

whether or not the measure included alternate sites[Footnote 30] and 

kiosks.[Footnote 31] Similarly, the formula only considers the location 

of Taxpayer Assistance Centers (TAC), not their hours of operation or 

services provided. Although we saw no evidence that this lack of 

clarity led to adverse consequences, it could. For example, management 

or other stakeholders may determine that TACs are needed in certain 

areas of the country to improve geographic coverage when, in fact, 

alternate sites and/or kiosks are already serving those areas. IRS 

officials said that they have plans to revise the formula to include 

alternate sites and kiosks. (The other measures that lack clarity, as 

described in table 8 of appendix II, are “return preparation contacts,” 

“return preparation units,” “TACs total contacts,” “forms contact,” 

“tax law contacts,” “account contacts,” “other contacts,” “tax law 

accuracy,” “accounts/notices accuracy,” and “return preparation 

accuracy.”):



All Field Assistance Measures Are Objective and Have Targets That Are 

Either in Place or Being Established:



We determined that all of field assistance’s 14 performance measures 

are objective because, to the greatest extent possible, they are free 

of significant bias or manipulation and indicate specifically what is 

to be observed, in which population or conditions, and in what 

timeframes. Of the 14 measures, 7 have targets in place to help 

determine whether overall goals and objectives were achieved. Of the 

seven measures without targets, three were being baselined (i.e., IRS 

was collecting data for use in setting first-time targets). The 

remaining four measures were being designed at the time of our review. 

Targets will be set for these measures upon completion of data 

collection.



Data Collection Process Affects Reliability of Several Field Assistance 

Measures:



Eight of field assistance’s 14 performance measures are based on a data 

collection process that is subject to inconsistencies and human error, 

meaning that the same results may not be produced in similar 

circumstances. All TAC employees are to use Form 5311 (Field Assistance 

Activity Report) to manually report their daily hours and type of 

assistance provided. Supervisors are to review the forms for accuracy 

and forward them for manual input into the Resources Management 

Information System.[Footnote 32] These layers of manual input are 

subject to error and can hinder data reliability that could (1) lead 

managers or other stakeholders to draw inappropriate conclusions about 

program performance, (2) not alert them to the existence of problems, 

or (3) not help them respond when problems arise. For example, as we 

noted in our report on IRS’s 2001 tax filing season, our calculations 

showed that the data reported by TACs did not account for the wait 

times of about 661,000 taxpayers, or about 13 percent of taxpayers 

served.[Footnote 33] IRS expects to minimize this human error by 

equipping all of its TACs with an on-line automated tracking and 

reporting system known as the Queuing Management System (Q-Matic). This 

system is expected, among other things, to more efficiently monitor 

customer traffic flow and wait times and eliminate staff time spent 

completing Form 5311.[Footnote 34]



IRS has taken steps to solve data reliability problems with field 

assistance’s customer satisfaction measure. In a May 2000 report, the 

Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration concluded that IRS 

had not established an adequate management process to ensure that the 

survey yielded accurate, reliable, and statistically valid 

results.[Footnote 35] To field assistance’s credit and with the help of 

a vendor, it (1) completed major revisions to the customer satisfaction 

survey, such as using a different index scale; (2) included space for 

written comments, which were to be provided to managers on a routine 

basis; and (3) improved controls to ensure the survey is available to 

all taxpayers. However, problems arose regarding the manner in which 

the vendor was providing site managers with data containing cumulative 

responses and, as of June 2002, the vendor had temporarily stopped 

providing feedback to site managers and was in the process of 

determining a more usable format to relay information to managers. The 

improved data collection method is being implemented and IRS 

anticipates an increase in the precision with which it measures field 

assistance customer satisfaction.



Field Assistance Measures Cover Core Program Activities with Limited 

Overlap:



Field assistance’s measures cover its core program activities with 

limited overlap. Field assistance identifies its core program 

activities as face-to-face assistance, education, and compliance 

services, which include such activities as preparing returns, answering 

tax law questions, resolving account and notice inquiries, and 

supplying forms and publications. For example, field assistance has an 

“accounts contact” measure (counts the number of contacts made) and an 

“accounts accuracy” measure (measures the accuracy of the responses) to 

reflect both the quantity and quality of its accounts-related 

assistance.



Field assistance identified some overlap between two measures, “return 

preparation contacts” and “return preparation units.” It has decided, 

for Strategy and Program Plan purposes, to discontinue the “contacts” 

measure (which counts the number of customers assisted) and keep the 

“units” measure (which counts the number of returns prepared) because 

the “units” measure better reflects the amount of return preparation 

work done.[Footnote 36] Field assistance will continue tracking the 

“contacts” measure outside of the Strategy and Program Plan in order to 

determine customer demand for service at particular sites. We concur 

with IRS’s plans to track the “contacts” measure outside of the 

Strategy and Program Plan because it is a diagnostic tool that can be 

used for analysis purposes.



Field Assistance Is Missing Some Measures Needed to Balance 

Governmentwide Priorities:



Field assistance continues to develop its suite of performance 

measures. As part of that effort, it is beginning to deploy important 

quality measures, such as “tax law accuracy.” However, other important 

measures of timeliness, efficiency, and cost of service are missing, 

which impairs balance.



* Timeliness. Before fiscal year 2001, field assistance had a 

performance measure that officially tracked how long customers waited 

to receive service from an employee. According to managers, it was 

discontinued because employees were serving taxpayers as quickly as 

possible in order to meet timeliness goals, which negatively affected 

service quality.[Footnote 37] In March 2002, management went further 

and (1) eliminated its requirement for TACs not equipped with Q-Matic 

to submit biweekly wait-time reports and (2) doubled, from 15 to 30 

minutes, the wait-time interval to be used by TACs with Q-Matic in 

computing the percentage of customers served on time. Officials said 

that they took these steps because employees continued to feel 

pressured to hurry assistance despite the discontinuance of the 

official timeliness measure. However, one purpose of balanced measures 

is to avoid an inappropriate emphasis on just one aspect of 

performance. The presence of a quality measure should provide a 

disincentive for employees to ignore quality in favor of timeliness. 

Similarly, in the absence of a timeliness performance measure, (1) 

field assistance may not be balancing its customers’ needs for timely 

service with their needs for accurate information and (2) IRS is not 

held accountable for timeliness to stakeholders, such as the Congress.



* Efficiency. Efficiency, or productivity as it is often referred to, 

shows how efficiently IRS’s resources are transformed into the 

production of field assistance services. Field assistance officials 

said they would like to develop an efficiency measure, but no plans are 

in place. Among other things, having an efficiency measure would help 

managers identify performance strengths and weaknesses.



* Cost of Service. As required by GPRA, agencies should have 

performance measures that correlate the level of program activity and 

program cost. Without such a measure in field assistance, officials do 

not know how much it costs to provide face-to-face service. Field 

assistance officials said that they would like to develop a cost of 

service measure, but they are not certain how to calculate it.



Submission Processing Measures:



As shown in table 5, all 11 of submission processing’s performance 

measures have many of the attributes of successful performance 

measures. However, as summarized in this section, we identified several 

opportunities for improvement, especially in the area of reliability. 

Table 9 in appendix II has more detailed information about each 

submission processing measure, including any weaknesses we identified 

and any recommendations for improvement.



Table 5: Overview of Our Assessment of Submission Processing Measures:



[See PDF for image]



Note: A check mark denotes that the measure has the attribute.



[A] We were unable to verify the linkages between goals and measures 

because of insufficient documentation.



[B] Core program activities of submission processing are to efficiently 

and accurately process returns, remittances, and refunds and issue 

notices and letters.



[C] Submission processing measures cover various governmentwide 

priorities, such as efficiency, timeliness, and accuracy; however, 

submission processing’s measures did not include a measure for customer 

satisfaction or for showing how much it costs to process the average 

return.



Source: GAO analysis.



[End of table]



Alignment between IRS’s Goals and Submission Processing Measures Is 

Uncertain:



No formal documentation exists to show how submission processing’s

11 measures are aligned with IRS’s mission, its agencywide goals, and 

its operating division goals. Despite this lack of formal 

documentation, submission processing officials said, and we generally 

concur, that some linkage does exist. Without complete documentation, 

however, we could not verify all the linkages. Submission processing 

officials stated that staff and managers are aware of the link between 

measures and goals because the submission processing organization has 

taken action to help ensure that staff understand the measures and 

their role in supporting IRS’s overall mission and strategic and 

operating goals. For example, according to submission processing 

officials, they visited all eight W&I processing centers in 2001 to 

talk directly with staff and managers about the importance of balanced 

performance measures in ensuring that IRS meets its goals. Complete 

documentation of the linkages between goals and measures could further 

enhance understanding of those goals and measures with managers and 

staff.



Submission Processing Measures Have Clarity, with One Exception:



All but one of the submission processing measures have clarity and 

provide information to enable executives, other managers, and outside 

stakeholders to properly assess performance against goals. The one 

exception is the productivity measure.



Managers in different processing centers told us that they did not use 

the productivity measure to provide them with performance information 

or to help them assess performance because, among other things, the 

measure does not provide specific information about their unit’s or 

center’s performance or their contribution to overall productivity. 

This is because the measure, as designed, is a compilation of different 

types of work IRS performs in processing returns, remittances, and 

refunds and issuing notices and letters. As a result, unit managers 

used different productivity measures specific to their own processes to 

help them identify how to increase their area’s productivity. However, 

according to IRS officials, the productivity measure is useful and 

provides adequate information to some IRS executives.



From our perspective, although the productivity measure may be 

meaningful to executives, the fact that field managers use other 

measures and profess not to understand the current productivity measure 

indicates that the current measure does not provide those managers with 

useful information that would alert them to problems and help them 

respond when problems arise. In addition, because the measure is 

calculated by compiling and weighting different types of processing 

work per staff year expended, it may be too confusing to be useful to 

outside stakeholders, such as Congress.



All Submission Processing Measures Have Targets and Most Are Objective:



All 11 of submission processing’s measures have measurable targets and 

most are objective (i.e., reasonably free of significant bias or 

manipulation). For example, the “notice error rate” had a target of

8.1 percent for fiscal year 2001. The “deposit timeliness” measure 

appears to be objective, for example, because the Integrated Submission 

and Remittance Processing System[Footnote 38] automatically calculates 

data on which the measure is based. However, the “notice error rate” 

and “letter error rate” measures are not objective because the coding 

required as part of data collection by individual reviewers is subject 

to much interpretation that could systematically bias the results of 

the measures. In October 

2002, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration reported, 

based on a review at two processing centers, that the “deposit error 

rate” measure was not objective, because the associated sampling plan 

was not consistently implemented.[Footnote 39] The Treasury Inspector 

General for Tax Administration recommended that IRS take steps to 

ensure consistent implementation, and IRS reported that steps have been 

taken.



Five Submission Processing Measures Lack Reliability:



Five measures are subject to consistency problems that affect the 

reliability of the measures. Those measures are “refund timeliness--

individual (paper),” “notice error rate,” “refund error rate,” “letter 

error rate,” and “deposit error rate.” Specifically, the five measures 

are based on a data collection process, which according to the Director 

of Submission Processing, involves about 80 staff who identify, 

interpret, and analyze errors at the eight W&I processing centers. The 

“notice error rate” and “letter error rate” measures also involve 

coding that is subject to further interpretation.



Submission processing managers recognized that staff inconsistently 

coded notice and letter errors during the 2001 filing season. Neither 

IRS nor we know the extent to which such inconsistencies exist because 

no routine studies are done to validate the accuracy of data 

collection. Reliability and credibility increase when such studies are 

done. Submission processing initiated studies beginning in June 2001 to 

improve reliability, but has not established any improvement goals.



Submission Processing Measures Cover Core Program Activities without 

Overlap:



Each of submission processing’s measures directly pertains to one of 

the core program activities of submission processing’s business 

operations--timely, efficiently, and accurately processing returns, 

remittances, and refunds and issuing notices and letters--without 

redundancy or overlap. For example, the “refund error rate--individual 

(paper)” measure directly pertains to one of submission processing’s 

core program activities, processing refunds, and does not overlap with 

any of the other 11 measures.



Unlike the other three program areas we reviewed, submission processing 

has two customers--taxpayers, to whom IRS issues refunds and sends 

notices, and the Department of the Treasury, for which IRS deposits 

remittances. Therefore, for some measures, such as “refund timeliness,” 

IRS views taxpayers as the customer, while for other measures, such as 

“deposit timeliness,” IRS views Treasury as the customer. Submission 

processing officials believe that this dual-customer perspective 

provides a complete view of their operations and the measures cover all 

aspects of their operations while still being limited to a manageable 

number.



Submission Processing Measures Cover Various Governmentwide 

Priorities, but Are Not Fully Balanced:



Submission processing’s measures cover various governmentwide 

priorities, such as efficiency, timeliness, and accuracy. However, at 

the time of our review, submission processing measures lacked balance 

because they did not include a measure for customer satisfaction or a 

measure showing how much it costs to process a return.



Although submission processing officials believe that some existing 

measures, such as “notice error rate” and “refund timeliness,” provide 

information related to the customer’s experience, they recognize that 

directly obtaining customers’ perspectives would be more accurate than 

assuming their experience based on such measures. Thus, submission 

processing is obtaining customer satisfaction information as part of 

IRS’s corporate customer satisfaction survey, which IRS expects will be 

available by the 2003 filing season.



Similar to the other three program areas, submission processing does 

not have a cost of service measure.[Footnote 40] Among other things, 

not having a cost of service measure affects IRS’s ability to 

adequately compare different types of processing, such as paper versus 

electronic. In our view, because IRS does not take into account the 

cost to process a particular type of return, managers cannot fully 

understand the effectiveness of their unit.



Conclusions:



Because the filing season affects so many taxpayers, IRS’s performance 

is important. Having successful performance measures that demonstrate 

results, are limited to the vital few, cover multiple program 

priorities, and provide useful information to decision makers will help 

IRS management and stakeholders, such as Congress, make decisions about 

how to fund and improve return processing and assistance to taxpayers.



Despite the challenge of developing a set of 53 measures that satisfy 

our criteria, IRS has made significant progress. As developed to date, 

the measures satisfy many of our nine attributes for successful 

performance measures. For example, in all four of the program areas we 

reviewed, most measures covered the core activities of each program and 

had targets in place. IRS also has several on-going improvement 

initiatives, such as the effort to redesign all aspects of its 

telephone assistance quality measures.



Although the measures satisfied many of the nine attributes, our 

evaluation also showed that they do not have all the characteristics of 

successful performance measures. The most significant weaknesses 

include (1) the inability of some measures to provide clear information 

to decision makers about program performance, (2) data collection 

methods that hamper objectivity and reliability, and (3) measures to 

cover governmentwide priorities that are missing from the Strategy and 

Program Plan. Although such weaknesses do not mean that the measures 

are not useful, IRS risks basing program and resource allocation 

decisions on inadequate or incomplete information and is less 

accountable until the weaknesses are addressed.



Correcting these weaknesses is important in order to (1) create a 

results-oriented environment that demonstrates and tracks how IRS’s 

programs and activities contribute to achieving its mission and 

strategic goals, (2) avoid creating an excess of data that could 

obscure key information needed to identify problem areas and assess 

goal achievement, (3) form a balanced environment that takes the core 

program activities of the program into account, and (4) provide 
managers 

and other stakeholders with critical information on which to base their 

decisions.



Recommendations for Executive Action:



We recommend that the Commissioner of Internal Revenue direct the 

appropriate officials to do the following:



Take steps to ensure that agencywide goals clearly align with operating 

division goals and performance measures for each of the four areas 

reviewed. Specifically, (1) clearly document the relationship among 

agencywide goals, operating division goals, and performance measures 

(the other three program areas may want to consider developing a 

template similar to the one field assistance developed, shown in figure 

4) and (2) ensure that the relationship among goals and measures is 

communicated to staff at all levels of the organization.



Make the name and definition of several field assistance measures 

(i.e., “geographic coverage,” “return preparation contacts,” “ return 

preparation units,” “TACs total contacts,” “forms contacts,” “tax law 

contacts,” “account contacts,” “other contacts,” “tax law accuracy,” 

“accounts/notices accuracy,” and “return preparation accuracy”) more 

clear to indicate what is and is not included in the formula.



As discussed in the body of this report and in appendix II, modify the 

formulas used to compute various measures to improve clarity. If 

formulas cannot be implemented in time for the next issuance of the 

Strategy and Program Plan, then modify the name and definition of the 

following measures so it is clearer what is or is not included in the 

measure.



* Remove automated calls from the formula for the “CSR level of 

service” measure.



* Revise the “CSR response level” measure to include calls from 

taxpayers who tried to reach a CSR but did not, such as those who 

(1) hung-up while waiting to speak to a CSR, (2) were provided access 

only to automated services and hung up, and (3) received a busy signal.



* Analyze and use new or existing data to determine why calls are 

transferred and use the data to revise the “CSR services provided” 

measure so that it only reflects transferred calls in which the caller 

received help from more than one CSR (i.e., exclude calls in which a 

CSR simply transferred the call and did not provide service.):



* Either discontinue use of the “number of IRS digital daily Web site 

hits” measure or revise the way “hits” are calculated so that the 

measure more accurately reflects usage.



* Revise field assistance’s “geographic coverage” measure by ensuring 

that the formula better reflects (1) the various types of field 

assistance facilities, including alternate sites and kiosks; (2) the 

types of services provided by each facility; and (3) the facility’s 

operating hours.



* Revise submission processing’s “productivity” measure so it provides 

more meaningful information to users.



Refrain from making changes to official targets, such as electronic 

filing and assistance did in fiscal year 2001, unless extenuating 

circumstances arise. Disclose any extenuating circumstances in the 

Strategy and Program Plan and other key documents.



Modify procedures for the toll-free customer satisfaction survey, 

possibly by requiring that administrators listen to the entire call, to 

better ensure that administrators (1) notify CSRs that their call was 

selected for the survey as close to the end of a call as possible and 

(2) can accurately answer the questions they are responsible for on the 

survey.



Implement annual effectiveness studies to validate the accuracy of the 

data collection methods used for the five telephone measures (“toll-

free tax law quality,” “toll-free accounts quality,” “toll-free tax law 

correct response rate,” “toll-free account correct response rate,” and 

“toll-free timeliness”) subject to potential consistency problems. The 

studies could determine the extent to which variation exists in 

collecting data and recognize the associated impact on the affected 

measures. For those measures, and for the five submission processing 

measures that already have effectiveness studies in place (“refund 

timeliness-individual (paper),” “notice error rate,” “refund error 

rate--individual (paper),” “letter error rate,” and “deposit error 

rate”), IRS should establish goals for improving consistency, as 

needed.



Ensure that plans to remove overlapping measures in telephone and field 

assistance are implemented.



As discussed in the body of this report, include the following missing 

measures in the Strategy and Program Plan in order to better cover 

governmentwide priorities and achieve balance.



* In the spirit of provisions in the Chief Financial Officers Act of 

1990 and Financial Accounting Standards Number 4, develop a cost

of services measure using the best information currently available 

for each of the four areas discussed in this report, recognizing data 

limitations as prescribed by GPRA. In doing so, adhere to guidance, 

such as Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76, and consider 

seeking outside counsel to determine best or industry practices.



* Given the importance of automated telephone assistance, develop a 

customer satisfaction survey and measure for automated assistance.



* Put the “automated completion rate” measure back in the Strategy and 

Program Plan after revising the formula so that calls for recorded tax 

law information are not counted as completed when taxpayers hang up 

before receiving service.



* Add one or more quality measures to electronic filing and 

assistance’s suite of measures in the Strategy and Program Plan. 

Possible measures include “processing accuracy,” “refund timeliness, 

electronically filed,” and “number of electronic returns rejected.”:



* Re-implement field assistance’s timeliness measure.



* Develop a measure that provides information about field assistance’s 

efficiency.



Agency Comments and Our Evaluation:



The Commissioner of Internal Revenue provided written comments on a 

draft of this report in a letter dated November 1, 2002, which is 

reprinted in appendix III. The Commissioner was pleased to see that 

many of the measures had the attributes for successful performance and 

agreed that others presented opportunities for further refinement. He 

stated that the report was objective and balanced and that our 

observation of the on-going nature of the performance measurement 

process was on point. Furthermore, he noted that the attributes we 

developed can be used as a checklist when performance measures are 

developed in the future.



Of our 18 recommendations, IRS:



* agreed with 10 and cited planned corrective actions that were 

responsive to those recommendations;



* cited actions taken or planned in response to 2 that did not fully 

address our concerns; and:



* disagreed with 6.





The following discussion focuses on the recommendations with which IRS 

disagreed or for which we believe additional action is necessary to 

address our concerns.



In response to our recommendation about clarifying the name and 

definition of several field assistance measures, IRS said that the 

recently updated data dictionary addressed our concerns. We reviewed 

the updated data dictionary. The modifications are substantial and 

provide significant additional information about the measures. However, 

the definitions remain unclear. Specifically, the definitions should 

either define a taxpayer assistance center or state whether or not 

alternate sites, such as kiosks and mobile sites, are included.



IRS did not agree that automated calls should be removed from the 

formula for the “CSR level of service” measure. IRS said that including 

the count of callers who choose an automated service while waiting for 

CSR service is appropriate. IRS’s response does not accurately 

characterize all the calls answered by automation that are included in 

the “CSR level of service” measure. Rather than choosing an automated 

service while waiting for a CSR, some callers complete an automated 

service after hearing an announcement that, due to high call volume, 

only automated services are available--a choice is not involved. We 

believe that the “CSR level of service” measure, because of its name 

and the way it is calculated, could be misleading and might 

misrepresent taxpayers’ access to CSR’s. For example, increasing the 

percentage of calls served through automation because a CSR was not 

available--meaning that CSR’s were actually more difficult to reach--

would improve the “CSR level of service” measure, thus giving the 

impression that access to CSR’s had improved when it had actually 

gotten worse. Calls answered through automation, regardless of the type 

of assistance (CSR or automation) the caller was originally seeking, 

should be reflected in an automated-level-of-service measure, such as 

“automated service completion rate.”:



IRS did not agree that it should modify the “CSR response level” 

measure to include calls in which the caller hung up before receiving 

service or got a busy signal. IRS said that altering the measure would 

deviate from industry standards and hinder IRS’s ability to gauge 

success in meeting this “world class service” goal. We support IRS’s 

efforts to gauge its progress toward providing world class customer 

service by telephone. However, IRS’s use of the same telephone wait-

time measure used by others may actually hinder a meaningful comparison 

of IRS with industry leaders. The “CSR response level” measure shows, 

for the callers who reached a CSR, the percentage that waited 30 

seconds or less. According to IRS officials, when taxpayers call IRS 

attempting to reach a CSR, they are much less likely to reach one than 

when they call a recognized telephone service leader (i.e., callers to 

IRS are more likely to hang up while waiting to speak to a CSR, hang up 

after being given access to only automated service because a CSR is not 

available, or receive a busy signal). Therefore, when the “CSR response 

level” measure (which excludes these hang-ups and busy signals) is used 

by IRS, the measure may represent the experience of a significantly 

smaller percentage of the total callers that attempted to reach an a 

CSR than when the same measure is used by industry leaders, thus 

potentially overstating the ease with which callers reached IRS CSR’s. 

Data we obtained from IRS suggest that there were about an equal number 

of hang-ups and busy signals as calls answered in this measure in 2001.



In response to our recommendation about implementing annual studies to 

validate the accuracy of various data collection methods and 

establishing goals for improving consistency, IRS said that it (1) has 

an ongoing process to ensure proper administration of the collection 

methods for the telephone measures cited in our recommendation, (2) 

does not agree that an annual independent review by non-CQRS analysts 

is merited, and (3) does not agree that it should incorporate 
consistency 

improvement goals in the Strategy and Program Plan process. As we noted 

in our report, telephone assistance’s CQRS has some controls in place 
to 

monitor consistency. However, we believe that reliability and 

credibility increase when performance data are checked or tested for 

significant errors, which IRS currently does not do. We did not 

recommend that non-CQRS analysts do these reviews; who does the reviews 

is for IRS to decide. Also, we recognized in our report that submission 

processing has an on-going process to verify consistency and that it 

has found problems. Because that review process has found some 

problems, we believe that establishing goals for improving consistency 

in submission processing is warranted. Because telephone assistance 

does not have a review process in place, we do not know whether 

improvement goals are needed, but noted that they could be. We did not 

recommend that these goals become a part of the Strategy and Program 

Plan process. Instead, these goals should become part of the review 

process and be made known to staff who are performing the work.



IRS disagreed with our recommendation that it put the “automated 

completion rate” measure back in the Strategy and Program Plan. 

Instead, IRS said it would continue to track and monitor that rate as a 

diagnostic measure. IRS told us that its decision is based on the fact 

that data on automated calls are not good enough to merit the attention 

the measure would have at the Strategy and Program Plan level. We 

recognize that there are data weaknesses with this measure. That is why 

our recommendation calls for IRS to revise the formula before returning 

the measure to the Strategy and Program Plan. Because serving more 

callers through automation is important to IRS’s strategy for improving 

taxpayer service, we believe that IRS needs a measure of the level of 

service provided by automation in its Strategy and Program Plan to 

balance its measure of the level of service provided by CSRs. Other 

than counts of the number of calls served, IRS has no measure of its 

effectiveness in serving taxpayers through automation. Without such a 

measure, IRS risks poorly serving the increasing number of taxpayers 

being served through automation while possibly improving access for a 

declining number of callers who need to speak with a CSR.



IRS does not believe that adding one or more quality measures to 

electronic filing and assistance’s suite of measures in the Strategy 

and Program Plan would enhance the electronic filing program. It noted 

that it tracks the quality of electronic filing outside the Strategy 

and Program Plan and that quality has been consistently high. We 

recognize that electronic filing and assistance tracks quality outside 

the Strategy and Program Plan. However, we disagree with IRS’s position 

that adding quality measures to that plan would not enhance the 

program. According to IRS officials, measures in the Strategy and 

Program Plan are the highest, most comprehensive level of measures for 

which they are accountable. In addition, many of those measures are 

made available to outside stakeholders. By not elevating these measures 

of quality to the Strategy and Program Plan, electronic filing and 

assistance risks not being held to any quality standards. Furthermore, 

not having quality measures hampers balance among electronic filing and 

assistance’s suite of measures and is not consistent with IRS’s 

balanced measurement program or the intent of IRS’s Restructuring and 

Reform Act of 1998.



IRS disagreed with our recommendation that it re-implement field 

assistance’s timeliness measure. IRS said that although timeliness 

goals are important in providing service to taxpayers, they are 

detrimental to quality service because field assistance employees tend 

to rush customers when traffic is high. This position is inconsistent 

with IRS’s balanced measurement program and the intent of IRS’s 

Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998. Although the accuracy of 

assistance is an important measure of quality, the timeliness of that 

assistance is also an important and balancing aspect of quality. 

Without this balancing emphasis, staff could theoretically take 

excessive time providing quality tax law assistance to a few taxpayers 

regardless of the impact on the wait-time for other taxpayers. We agree 

that Q-Matic is the best source of this information and support IRS’s 

plans to implement it nationwide. IRS also stated that it could use 

feedback from its customer satisfaction surveys to obtain information 

about the “promptness of service.” As we noted in our report, problems 

arose in the manner with which the feedback was provided from the 

vendor and the vendor had stopped providing feedback to site managers 

until the problems could be resolved. Even when those problems are 

resolved, a timeliness measure based on actual IRS data versus 

taxpayers’ perceptions would be meaningful.



Regarding our recommendation about implementing an efficiency measure 

in field assistance, IRS said that it will be testing a system for use 

as a “diagnostic tool” to monitor and evaluate the strengths and 

weaknesses of various productivity measures. However, IRS’s response 

was silent as to whether or when it would establish a field assistance 

productivity measure. Maintaining and enhancing organizational 

productivity is a fundamental agency management responsibility. The 

extent to which IRS’s field assistance organization is meeting this 

basic responsibility needs to be visible to IRS, Treasury, and 

congressional stakeholders in the form of an organizational performance 

measure, rather than a “diagnostic tool,” which is generally visible 

only to IRS managers.



We are sending copies of this report to the Chairmen and Ranking 

Minority Members of the Senate Committee on Finance and the House 

Committee on Ways and Means and the Ranking Minority Member of this 

Subcommittee. We are also sending copies to the Secretary of the 

Treasury; the Commissioner of Internal Revenue; the Director, Office of 

Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will make 

copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be 

available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov.



This report was prepared under the direction of David J. Attianese, 

Assistant Director. Other major contributors are acknowledged in 

appendix IV. If you have any questions about this report, contact

Mr. Attianese or me on (202) 512-9110.



Sincerely yours,



James R. White

Director, Tax Issues



[Signed by James R. White



[End of section]



Appendix I: Expanded Explanation of Our Attributes and Methodology for 

Assessing IRS’s Performance Measures:



Performance goals and measures that successfully address important and 

varied aspects of program performance are key to a results-oriented, 

balanced work environment. Measuring performance allows organizations 

to track the progress they are making toward their goals and gives 

managers critical information on which to base decisions for improving 

their programs. Organizations need to have performance measures that 

(1) demonstrate results, (2) are limited to the vital few, (3) cover 

multiple program priorities, and (4) provide useful information for 

decision making in order to track how their programs and activities can 

contribute to attaining the organization’s goals and mission. These 

four characteristics are important to accurately reveal the strengths 

and weaknesses of a program since measures are often the key motivators 

of performance and goal achievement.



For use as criteria to determine whether the Internal Revenue Service’s 

(IRS) performance measures in four key program areas--telephone 

assistance, electronic filing and assistance, field assistance, and 

submission processing--demonstrate results, are limited to the vital 

few, cover multiple program priorities, and are useful in decision 

making, we developed nine attributes of performance goals and measures 

based on previously established GAO criteria. In addition, we 

considered key legislation, such as the Government Performance and 

Results Act of 1993 (GPRA) and the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 

1998, and performance management literature cited in the bibliography 
and 

related products sections at the end of this report. Our nine 
attributes 

may not cover all the attributes of successful performance measures; 

however, we believe these are some of the most important. We shared 

these attributes with IRS officials responsible for performance 

measurement issues, such as the Acting Director of the Organizational 

Performance Division; and several officials in the Wage and Investment 

(W&I) operating division, such as the Director of Strategy and Finance; 

the Chief of Planning and Analysis; the Director of Customer Account 

Services; and the Director of Field Assistance. These officials 

generally agreed with the relevance of the attributes and our review 

approach.



We applied these attributes to the 53 filing season measures in W&I’s 

fiscal year 2001-2003 Strategy and Program Plan in a systematic manner, 

but some judgment was required. To ensure consistency and reliability 

in our application of the attributes, we had one staff person 

responsible for each of the four areas. That staff person prepared the 

initial analysis and at least two other staff reviewed those detailed 

results. Several staff reviewed the results for all four areas. 

Inherently, the attributes described below are not weighted equally. 

Weaknesses identified in a particular attribute do not, 

in and of themselves, mean that a measure is ineffective or 

meaningless. Instead, weaknesses identified should be considered areas 

for further refinement.



Detailed information on each attribute, including an explanation, 

examples, and the methodology we used to assess that attribute with 

respect to the measures covered by our review, follows.



Attributes of Successful Performance Measures:



1. Is there a relationship between the performance goals and measures 

and an agency’s goals and mission? (Referred to as “linkage”):



Explanation: Performance goals and measures should align with an 

agency’s goals and mission. A cascading or hierarchal linkage moving 

from top management down to the operational level is important in 

setting goals agencywide, and the linkage from the operational level to 

the agency level provides managers and staff throughout an agency with 

a road map that (1) shows how their day-to-day activities contribute to 

attaining agencywide goals and mission and (2) helps define strategies 

for achieving strategic and annual performance goals. As agencies 

develop annual performance goals as envisioned by GPRA, they can serve 

as a bridge that links long-term goals to agencies’ daily operations. 

For example, an annual goal that is linked to a program and also to a 

long-term goal can be used both to (1) hold agencies and program 

offices accountable for achieving those goals and (2) assess the 

reasonableness and appropriateness of those goals for the agency as a 

whole. In addition, annual performance planning can be used to better 

define strategies for achieving strategic and annual performance goals.



Linkages between goals and measures are most effective when they are 

clearly communicated to all staff within an agency so that everyone 

understands what the organization is trying to achieve and the goals it 

seeks to reach. Communicating goals and their associated measures is a 

continuous process and supports the basis for everything the agency 

does each day. Communication creates a “line of sight” throughout an 

agency so that everyone understands what the organization is trying to 

achieve and the goals it seeks to reach.



Example: Submission processing’s “notice error rate” measure determines 

the percentage of incorrect notices issued to taxpayers by submission 

processing employees. The target set for this measure in 2001 was 

8.1 percent. This measure could be used to support the “notice 

redesign” improvement project as well as the operational priority to 

“prioritize notices and monitor and control notice issuance.” It also 

is used to support one of W&I’s goals--”to meet taxpayer demands for 

timely, accurate, and efficient services.” This W&I strategy aligns 

with IRS’s strategic goal, “top quality service to all taxpayers 

through fair and uniform application of the law,” which in turn, 

supports IRS’s mission to “provide America’s taxpayers top quality 

service by helping them understand and meet their tax responsibilities 

and by applying the tax law with integrity and fairness to all.”:



Methodology: We compared IRS’s measures with its targets, improvement 

projects, operational priorities, operating division goals, and 

agencywide goals and mission as documented in the Strategy and Program 

Plan. We also interviewed operational/unit managers and managers 

responsible for the Strategy and Program Plan about linkages and 

reviewed training materials.



2. Are the performance measures clearly stated? (Referred to as 

“clarity”):



Explanation: A measure has clarity when it is clearly stated and the 

name and definition are consistent with the methodology used for 

calculating the measure. A measure that is not clearly stated (i.e., 

contains extraneous or omits key data elements) or that has a name or 

definition that is inconsistent with how it is calculated can confuse 

users and could cause managers or other stakeholders to think that 

performance was better or worse than it actually was.



Example: Telephone assistance’s “average handle time” measure shows the 

average number of seconds Customer Service Representatives (CSRs) spent 

assisting callers. Its definition and formula are consistent with the 

name of the measure and clearly note that the measure includes talk and 

hold times and the time a CSR spends on work related to a call after 

the call is terminated.



Methodology: We compared the name of the measure, the written 

definition of the measure, and the formula or methodology for computing 

the measure. In several instances, we discussed certain components of 

the definition and formula with IRS officials to better understand its 

meaning and purpose. For example, we discussed components of telephone 

assistance’s quality measures with staff in Customer Account Services, 

and staff in the Centralized Quality Review Site. We also reviewed on-

line information available to field assistance managers from the 

Queuing Management System (Q-Matic).[Footnote 41] We spoke to managers 

at different levels within each of the four areas we reviewed and asked 

them about the information they received and how they used it. In 

addition, we used some of the results of a random telephone survey of 

managers we conducted in 2001 at 84 of IRS’s 413 Taxpayer Assistance 

Centers (TAC) to solicit their views on the services provided at those 

offices.



3. Do the performance measures have targets, thus allowing for easier 

comparison with actual performance? (Referred to as “measurable 

target”):



Explanation: Where appropriate, performance goals and measures should 

have quantifiable, numerical targets or other measurable values. 

Numerical targets or other measurable values facilitate future 

assessments of whether overall goals and objectives were achieved 

because comparisons can be easily made between projected performance 

and actual results. Some goals are self-measuring (i.e., they are 

expressed objectively and are quantifiable) and therefore do not 

require additional measures to assess progress. When goals are not 

self-measuring, performance measures should translate those goals into 

observable conditions that determine what data to collect to learn 

whether progress was made toward achieving goals. The measures should 

have a clearly apparent or commonly accepted relation to the intended 

performance or have been shown to be reasonable predictors of desired 

behaviors or events. If a goal cannot be expressed in an objective, 

specific, and measurable form, GPRA allows the Office of Management and 

Budget to authorize agencies to develop alternative forms of 

measurement.[Footnote 42]



Example: Electronic filing and assistance’s “percent of individual 

returns electronically filed” had a numerical target of 31 percent in 

fiscal year 2001.



Methodology: We determined that a goal or measure had a measurable 

target when expected performance could be compared with actual results, 

and in general, was not changed during the measurement period. Each of 

the measures we reviewed was listed in the Strategy and Program Plan, 

which provides projections or targets for the current and two 

subsequent fiscal years. We verified that the target was measurable. 

When the Strategy and Program Plan did not show a target, we contacted 

appropriate IRS officials to determine why.



4. Are the performance goals and measures objective? (Referred to as 

“objectivity”):



Explanation: To the greatest extent possible, goals and measures should 

be reasonably free of significant bias or manipulation that would 

distort the accurate assessment of performance. They should not allow 

subjective considerations or judgments to dominate the outcome of the 

measurement. To be objective, performance goals and measures should 

indicate specifically what is to be observed, in which population or 

conditions, and in what timeframe and be free of opinion and judgment. 

Objectivity is important because it adds credibility to the performance 

goals and measures by ensuring that significant bias or manipulation 

will not distort the measure.



Example: The “customer satisfaction” measure for telephone assistance 

has the potential for bias and therefore may not be objective. Survey 

administrators are instructed to notify the CSR towards the end of the 

call that his or her call was selected to participate in the survey. A 

potential problem arises because administrators are not required to 

listen to the entire call, and it can be difficult to determine when 

the call is about to end. Therefore, if a CSR is notified prior to the 

end of the call that the call was selected for survey, the CSR could 

change behavior towards the taxpayer, thus affecting the results of the 

survey and the measure.



Methodology: We reviewed information in IRS guidance or procedures, 

data collection instruments, reports, and other documents. We held 

discussions about objectivity with various staff and officials, such as 

data owners and analysts, within each of the four areas we reviewed. 

Because our interviews raised questions about the objectivity of some 

measures for telephone assistance, we monitored some taxpayer calls and 

interviewed an official from IRS’s customer satisfaction survey 

contractor, Pacific Consulting Group.



5. To what extent do the performance goals and measures provide a 

reliable way to assess progress? (Referred to as “reliability”):



Explanation: Reliability refers to whether measures are amenable to 

applying standard procedures for collecting data or calculating results 

so that they would be likely to produce the same results if applied 

repeatedly to the same situation. Errors can occur at various points in 

the collection, maintenance, processing, and reporting of data. 

Significant errors would affect conclusions about the extent to which 

performance goals have been achieved. Likewise, errors could cause the 

measure to report performance at either a higher or lower level than is 

actually being attained. Reliability is increased when verification and 

validation procedures, such as checking performance data for 

significant errors by formal evaluation or audit, exist.



Example: Field assistance’s “return preparation contacts” measure 

tracks the total number of customers assisted with return preparation 

by IRS. This measure may not be reliable because it involves a 

significant amount of manual entry on Form 5311 (Field Assistance 

Activity Report) even at sites with the Q-Matic system. In addition to 

the potential for error associated with manual entry, the instructions 

for filing Form 5311 require that service time be recorded in whole 

hours, which can misconstrue actual service times and is less exact 

than the data in Q-Matic, which records service times in minutes.



Methodology: We looked for weaknesses in IRS’s guidance or procedures, 

data collection instruments, reports, and other documents that might 

cause errors. We discussed potential weaknesses with various officials, 

such as account data analysts, within each of the four areas we 

reviewed. Because these efforts revealed the potential for errors in 

measuring telephone performance, we monitored employees preparing data 

collection instruments for assessing telephone quality and customer 

satisfaction in Atlanta. Likewise, we monitored field assistance staff 

helping taxpayers and reporting their time using both the automated Q-

Matic system and Form 5311.



6. Do the performance measures sufficiently cover a program’s core 

activities? (Referred to as “core program activities”):



Explanation: Core program activities are the activities that an entity 

is expected to perform to support the intent of the program. 

Performance measures should be scoped to evaluate the core program 

activities. Limiting the number of performance measures to the core 

program activities will help identify performance that contributes to 

goal achievement. At the same time, however, there should be enough 

performance measures to ensure that managers have the information they 

need about performance in all the core program activities. Without such 

information, the possibility of achieving program goals is less likely.



Example: The core program activities for submission processing include 

(1) processing returns, (2) depositing remittances, (3) issuing 

refunds, and (4) sending out notices and letters. Each of submission 

processing’s 11 measures correspond to one of those core activities.

For example, the “number of individual 1040 series returns filed 
(paper)” 

measure corresponds to processing returns and the “letter error rate” 

measure corresponds with sending out notices and letters.



Methodology: We determined the core program activities of each of the 

four areas we reviewed based on IRS documentation and discussions with 

IRS officials. We reviewed the suite of performance measures for each 

of the four areas to determine whether measures existed that covered 

each core program activity. We determined whether any measures were 

missing or other pieces of information were needed to better manage 

programs by using judgment and questioning IRS officials. In addition, 

we reviewed the results of a questionnaire that we had used during a 

review of IRS’s 

2001 filing season to ask TAC managers about information needed to 

manage their program.



7. Does there appear to be limited overlap among the performance 

measures? (Referred to as “limited overlap”):



Explanation: Measures overlap when the results of measures provide 

basically the same information. A measure that overlaps with another is 

unnecessary and does not benefit program management. Unnecessary or 

overlapping measures not only can cost money but also can cloud the 

bottom line in a results-oriented environment by making managers or 

other stakeholders sift through unnecessary or redundant information. 

Some measures, however, may overlap partially and provide stakeholders 

some new information. In those cases, management must make a judgment 

as to whether having the additional information is worth the cost and 

possible confusion it may cause.



Example: Telephone assistance’s “toll-free average speed of answer” and 

“toll-free CSR response level” measures attempt to show how long a 

taxpayer waited before receiving assistance. The difference between the 

two measures is that the latter shows the percentage of taxpayers 

receiving assistance within 30 seconds while the former shows the 

average time taxpayers waited for service. These two measures are 

likely to be correlated and thus partially overlap. However, the amount 

of overlap between measures is management’s discretion.



Methodology: Within each of the four areas we reviewed, we looked at 

the suite of measures and compared the measures’ names and definitions. 

We also looked at the correlations between measures’ results. When two 

measures seemed similar, we discussed the potential for overlap with 

IRS officials.



8. Does there appear to be a balance among the performance goals and 

measures, or is there an emphasis on one or two priorities at the 

expense of others? (Referred to as “balance”):



Explanation: Balance exists when a suite of measures ensures that an 

organization’s various priorities are covered. IRS considers its 

measures to be balanced when they address customer satisfaction, 

employee satisfaction, and business results (quality and quantity). 

Performance measurement efforts that overemphasize one or two 

priorities at the expense of others may skew the agency’s performance 

and keep its managers from understanding the effectiveness of their 

programs in supporting IRS’s overall mission and goals.



Example: Submission processing has an employee satisfaction measure and 

several business results measures, such as “deposit timeliness.” As of 

October 2002, however, it had not fully implemented a customer 

satisfaction measure, which resulted in an unbalanced process that can 

overlook something as important as the customer’s perspective.



Methodology: For each of the four areas, we ensured that a measure 

existed for each component. If measures did not exist for certain 

components, we contacted IRS officials to find out why and to see what 

plans IRS has to ensure balance in the future.



9. Does the program or activity have performance goals and measures 

that cover governmentwide priorities? (Referred to as “governmentwide 

priorities”):



Explanation: Agencies should develop a range of related performance 

measures to address governmentwide priorities, such as quality, 

timeliness, efficiency, cost of service, and outcome. A range is 

important because most program activities require managers to balance 

these priorities among other demands. When complex program goals are 

broken down into a set of component quantifiable measures, it is 

important to ensure that the overall measurement of performance does 

not become biased because measures that assess some priorities but 

neglect others could place the program’s success at risk.



Example: Electronic filing and assistance provides the capability for 

taxpayers to transact and communicate electronically with IRS. The 

13 measures we reviewed included, for example, the number or percent of 

returns filed, the number of hits to or downloads from IRS’s Web site, 

and employee and customer satisfaction. The Strategy and Program Plan 

did not have any measures on the program’s quality or timeliness. Not 

having these measures means that management may not be sufficiently 

balancing competing demands.



Methodology: We analyzed the suite of measures in the Strategy and 

Program Plan for each of the four areas we reviewed. Based on 

discussions with IRS officials and our own judgment, we identified 

measures that appeared to be missing. We discussed those identified 

with IRS officials.



[End of section]



Appendix II: The 53 IRS Performance Measures Reviewed:



The following four tables provide information on the 53 performance 

measures we reviewed in the four program areas within the Internal 

Revenue Service’s (IRS) Wage and Investment (W&I) operating division 

that are critical to a successful filing season. Among other things, 

the tables show how each of the 53 measures matched up against the 

attributes in appendix I. The attributes not addressed in the tables 

are (1) “linkage,” because sufficient documentation did not exist to 

validate linkages with any of the measures and (2) “balance,” because 

that attribute does not apply to specific measures but, rather, to a 

program’s entire suite of measures. When reviewing the suite of 

measures, we found some instances where additional measures are 

warranted; the additional measures are generally not cited in these 

tables.



Telephone Assistance Performance Measures:



Of the 53 performance measures in our review, 15 are for telephone 

assistance.[Footnote 43] Table 6 has information about each of the 15 

telephone measures.



Table 6: Telephone Assistance Performance Measures:



Measure name and definition[A]: Total automated calls answered; A 

count of all toll-free calls answered at telephone assistance centers 

by an automated system (e.g., Telephone Routing Interactive System) and 

Tele-Tax.[B]; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 85,000,000 calls 

answered; Actual: 104,228,052 calls answered; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: Some overlap with automated completion rate measure. 

Both attempt to show how many automated calls were answered, but the 

automated completion rate tries to show the percentage that completed 

automated service successfully. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and 

obscure performance results; Recommendations: See note 1 to the 

table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Customer Service Representative (CSR) 

calls answered; The count of all toll-free calls answered at 

telephone assistance centers; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 

31,500,000 calls answered; Actual: 32,532,503 calls answered; 

Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Some overlap with CSR services 

provided measure. Both attempt to show how many calls CSRs answered, 

but CSR services provided tries to count calls requiring the help of 

more than one CSR as more than one call. Overlap could cloud the bottom 

line and obscure performance results; Recommendations: See note 1 to 

the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: CSR level of service; The relative 

success rate of taxpayers who call for toll-free services reaching a 

CSR; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 55%; Actual: 53.7%; Weaknesses 

of measure and consequences: Formula lacks clarity because it includes 

some automated calls, which overstates the number of calls answered by 

CSRs and thus the level of service being provided by CSRs.[C]; 
Definition 

lacks clarity because it does not disclose inclusion of some automated 

calls, which could lead to misinterpreted results or a failure to take 

proper action to resolve performance problems; Recommendations: Remove 
automated calls 

from the formula.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free customer satisfaction; 

Customer’s perception of service received, with a rating of “4” being 

the best; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 3.45 average score; 
Actual: 

3.45 average score; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Not clear 

because survey only applies to calls handled by CSRs. Satisfaction is 

not measured for calls handled by automation, which accounted for 76 

percent of all calls in fiscal year 2001; Potential bias exists 

(not objective) because administrators are not required to listen to 

the entire call, (1) CSRs could be prematurely notified that their call 

was selected for the survey, thus changing their behavior towards the 
caller 

and affecting the results of the survey and (2) administrators may not 
be 

able to correctly answer certain questions on the survey, which could 

impair the accuracy of the data; Recommendations: Develop a customer 

satisfaction survey for automated assistance; Modify procedures for 

the toll-free customer satisfaction survey, possibly by requiring that 

administrators listen to the entire call, to better ensure that 

administrators (1) notify CSRs that their call was selected for the 

survey as close to the end of a call as possible and (2) can accurately 

answer the questions they are responsible for on the survey.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free tax law quality[D]; 

Evaluates the correctness of answers given by CSRs to callers with tax 

law inquiries as well as CSRs’ conformance with IRS administrative 

procedures, such as whether the CSR gave his or her identification 

number to the taxpayer; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 74%; 

Actual: 75.21%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: A reliability 

weakness exists because evaluations are based on judgments that are 

potentially inconsistent. No routine studies to determine effectiveness 

of procedures to ensure consistency of data collection. Possible 

inconsistencies affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions 

about the extent to which performance goals have been achieved; Some 

overlap with toll-free tax law correct response rate. Both attempt to 

show the percentage of callers receiving accurate responses to tax law 

questions, but toll-free tax law quality includes CSR conformance with 

administrative procedures in computing that percentage. Overlap could 

cloud the bottom line and obscure performance results; 

Recommendations: Implement annual effectiveness studies to validate the 

accuracy of data collection methods and establish goals for improving 

consistency, as needed; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free accounts quality[E]; 

Evaluates the correctness of answers given by CSRs to callers with 

account-related inquiries as well as CSRs’ conformance with IRS 

administrative procedures, such as whether a CSR gave his or her 

identification number to the taxpayer; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: 67%; Actual: 69.17%; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: A reliability weakness exists because evaluations are 

based on judgments that are potentially inconsistent. No routine 

studies to determine effectiveness of procedures to ensure consistency 

of data collection. Possible inconsistencies affect the accuracy of the 

measure and conclusions about the extent to which performance goals 

have been achieved; Some overlap with toll-free account correct 

response rate. Both attempt to show the percentage of callers receiving 

accurate responses to account questions, but toll-free accounts quality 

includes CSR conformance with administrative procedures in computing 

that percentage. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure 

performance results; Recommendations: Implement annual effectiveness 

studies to validate the accuracy of data collection methods and 

establish goals for improving consistency, as needed; See note 1 to 

the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Average handle time; The average 

number of seconds CSRs spent assisting callers. It includes talk and 

hold times and the time a CSR spends on work related to a call after 

the call is terminated; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: not 

available; Actual: 609 seconds; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Target to be set upon completion of baseline data 

collection.[F]; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Automated completion rate; The 

percentage of total callers who completed a selected automated 

service; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: not available; Actual: 

not available; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Formula lacks 

clarity because it assumes that all callers seeking recorded tax law 

information, including those who hang up before receiving service, 

received the information they needed, which could produce inaccurate or 

misleading results; Not clear because definition does not disclose 

the previously mentioned assumption, which could lead to misinterpreted 

results or a failure to take proper action to resolve performance 

problems; Measure removed from the Strategy and Program Plan; target 

not available; Some overlap with total automated calls answered. 

Both attempt to show how many automated calls were answered, but 

automated completion rate tries to show the percentage that completed 

an automated service successfully. Overlap could cloud the bottom line 

and obscure performance results; Recommendations: Revise the measure 

so that calls for recorded tax law information are not counted as 

completed when callers hang up before receiving service; Put this 

measure back in the Strategy and Program Plan after revising the 

formula so that calls for recorded tax law information are not counted 

as completed when taxpayers hang up before receiving service; See 

note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: CSR services provided; The count of 

all calls handled by CSRs; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: not 

available; Actual: 35,799,122 calls answered; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: Not clear because definition does not disclose that 

IRS counts all calls transferred from one CSR to another as receiving 

an additional service, which could lead to misinterpreted results or a 

failure to take proper action to resolve performance problems. IRS does 

not have complete information on why calls were transferred. Thus, IRS 

cannot identify appropriate steps to reduce any inefficiency associated 

with transferred calls; Target to be set upon completion of baseline 

data collection[F]; Some overlap with CSR calls answered. Both 

attempt to show how many calls CSRs answered, but CSR services provided 

tries to count calls requiring the help of more than one CSR as more 

than one call. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure 

performance results; Recommendations: Analyze and use new or existing 

data to determine why calls are transferred and use the data to revise 

the measure so that it only reflects transferred calls in which the 

caller received help from more than one CSR (i.e., exclude calls in 

which a CSR simply transferred the call and did not provide service); 

See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free tax law correct response 

rate[G]; Evaluates the correctness of answers given by CSRs to callers 

with tax law inquiries; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 81.6%; 
Actual: 

79.53%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: A reliability weakness 

exists because evaluations are based on judgments that are potentially 

inconsistent. No routine studies to determine effectiveness of 
procedures 

to ensure consistency of data collection. Possible inconsistencies 
affect 

the accuracy of the measure and conclusions about the extent to which 

performance goals have been achieved; Some overlap with toll-free tax 

law quality. Both attempt to show the percentage of callers receiving 

accurate responses to tax law questions, but toll-free tax law quality 

includes CSR conformance to administrative procedures in computing that 

percentage. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure performance 

results; Recommendations: Implement annual effectiveness studies to 

validate the accuracy of data collection methods and establish goals 

for improving consistency, as needed; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free account correct response 

rate[H]; Evaluates the correctness of answers given by CSRs to callers 

with account-related inquiries; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 
90.8%; 

Actual: 88.72%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: A reliability 

weakness exists because evaluations are based on judgments that are 

potentially inconsistent. No routine studies to determine effectiveness 

of procedures to ensure consistency of data collection. Possible 

inconsistencies affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions 

about the extent to which performance goals have been achieved; 

Some overlap with toll-free accounts quality. Both attempt to show the 

percentage of callers receiving accurate responses to account 

questions, but toll-free accounts quality includes CSR conformance with 

administrative procedures in computing that percentage. Overlap could 

cloud the bottom line and obscure performance results; Recommendations: 

Implement annual effectiveness studies to validate the accuracy of the 

data collection methods and establish goals for improving consistency, 

as needed; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free timeliness[I]; The 

successful resolution of all issues resulting from the caller’s first 

inquiry (telephone only); FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 82%; 

Actual: 82.8%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: A reliability 

weakness exists because evaluations are based on judgments that are 

potentially inconsistent. No routine studies to determine effectiveness 

of procedures to ensure consistency of data collection. Possible 

inconsistencies affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions 

about the extent to which performance goals have been achieved; 

Recommendations: Implement annual effectiveness studies to validate the 

accuracy of data collection methods and establish goals for improving 

consistency, as needed.



Measure name and definition[A]: Toll-free employee satisfaction; The 

percentage of survey participants that answered with a 4 or 5 (two 

highest scores possible) to the question “considering everything, how 

satisfied are you with your job?”; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 

55%; Actual: 46%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None 

observed; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: CSR response level; The percentage of 

callers who started receiving service from a CSR within a specified 

period of time; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 49%; Actual: 40.8%; 

Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Not clear because formula does 

not include calls that received a busy signal or resulted in a hang-up 

before a CSR came on the line, and the definition does not disclose 
that 

exclusion. Performance may be overstated and the real customer 
experience 

not reflected; Some overlap with average speed of answer. Both attempt 

to show how long callers waited before receiving service, except that 

CSR response level shows the number of callers receiving service within 

30 seconds. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure performance 

results; Recommendations: Revise measure to include calls from 

taxpayers who tried to reach a CSR but did not, such as those who (1) 

hung-up while waiting to speak to a CSR, (2) were provided access only 

to automated services and hung up, and (3) received a busy signal; 

See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Average speed of answer; The average 

number of seconds callers waited in queue before receiving service from

a CSR; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: not available; Actual: 

295 seconds; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Target to be set 

upon completion of baseline data collection.[F]; Some overlap with 

toll-free CSR response level. Both attempt to show how long callers 

waited before receiving service, except that CSR response level shows 

the number of callers receiving service within 30 seconds. Overlap 

could cloud the bottom line and obscure performance results; 

Recommendations: See note 1 to the table.



Note 1: We identified this measure as having partial overlap with 

another measure. Telephone assistance officials generally agreed with 

our assessment and stated that some of these overlapping measures will 

be removed from future Strategy and Program Plans. The following 

recommendation applies to several measures as noted in the table: 

“ensure that plans to remove overlapping measures are implemented.”:



[A] The names of some measures have been modified slightly from the 

official names used by IRS for ease of reading and consistency 

purposes. For example, we replaced the word “assistor” with CSR. Also, 

the definitions of the measures listed in the table come from various 

IRS sources, including interviews.



[B] The Telephone Routing Interactive System is an interactive routes 

callers to CSRS or automated services and provides interactive 

services. Tele-Tax is a telephone system that provides automated 

services only.



[C] About 780,000 automated calls were included in the formula during 

the 2001 filing season. If they had not been included, the CSR level of 

service would have decreased by about 1 percentage point. The effect 

could be more significant in the future because IRS plans to increase 

the number of calls handled through automation.



[D] IRS plans to discontinue the “toll-free tax law quality” measure in 

fiscal year 2004.



[E] IRS plans to discontinue the “toll-free accounts quality” measure 

in fiscal year 2004.



[F] Although these measures did not have a measurable target in place, 

IRS is taking reasonable steps to develop a target.



[G] IRS changed the name of the “toll-free tax law correct response 

rate” measure to “customer accuracy for tax law inquiries” beginning in 

October 2002.



[H] IRS changed the name of the “toll-free account correct response 

rate” measure to “customer accuracy for account inquiries” beginning in 

October 2002.



[I] IRS discontinued the “toll-free timeliness” measure beginning in 

October 2002, and replaced it with a new “quality timeliness” measure.



Source: GAO comparison of IRS’s December 13, 2000, July 25, 2001, and 

October 29, 2001, Strategy and Program Plans with the attributes in 

appendix I and an Embedded Quality Discussion Document (7/23/02), which 

discusses the changes IRS plans for its telephone assistance quality 

measures.



[End of table]



Electronic Filing and Assistance Performance Measures:



Of the 53 performance measures in our review, 13 are for electronic 

filing and assistance.[Footnote 44] Table 7 has information about each 

of the 13 measures.



Table 7: Electronic Filing and Assistance Performance Measures:



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of 1040 series returns 

electronically filed (millions); The number of Forms 1040, 1040A, and 

1040EZ filed electronically; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 40.0; 

; Actual: 40.0; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Target changed 

during filing season from 42.0 to 40.0. Changing the target in this 

instance was subjective in nature and resulted in an objectivity 

weakness as well; Some overlap with percent of individual returns 

electronically filed. Both measures show the extent of electronic 

filing by individuals--one in absolute numbers, the other as a percent 

of total filings. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure 

performance results; Recommendations: Refrain from making changes to 

official targets unless extenuating circumstances arise; Disclose 

any extenuating circumstances in the Strategy and Program Plan and 

other key documents; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of business returns 

electronically filed (millions); The number of Forms 941, 1041, and 

1065 filed electronically; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 3.7; 

Actual: 1.66; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None observed; 

Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Total number of electronically filed 

returns (millions); The number of Forms 1040, 1040A, 1040EZ, 941, 

1041 and 1065 filed electronically; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: 43.7; Actual: 41.7; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: 

Target changed during filing season from 45.7 to 43.7. Changing the 

target in this instance was subjective in nature and resulted in an 

objectivity weakness as well; Recommendations: Refrain from making 

changes to official targets unless extenuating circumstances arise. 

Disclose any extenuating circumstances in the Strategy and Program Plan 

and other key documents.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of information returns 

electronically filed (millions); The total number of information 

returns filed electronically. Includes Forms 1098, 1099, 5498, and W-2G 

and Schedules K-1. Excludes Forms W-2 and 1099-SSA/RRB received from 

the Social Security Administration; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: 334.0; Actual: 322.8; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Some overlap with percent of information returns 

electronically filed. Both measures show the extent of electronic 

filing --one in absolute numbers, the other as a percent of total 

filings. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure performance 

results; Recommendations: See note 1 to table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Percent of information returns 

electronically filed; The percentage of total information returns 

filed electronically; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 24.4%; 

Actual: not available[B]; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Some 

overlap with number of information returns electronically filed. Both 

measures show the extent of electronic filing --one in absolute 

numbers, the other as a percent of total filings. Overlap could cloud 

the bottom line and obscure performance results; Recommendations: See 

note 1 to table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Percent of individual returns 

electronically filed; The percentage of total 1040 series tax returns 

(Forms 1040, 1040A, and 1040EZ) filed electronically; FY 2001 target 

and actual: Target: 31%; Actual: 32%; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Some overlap with number of 1040 series returns 

electronically filed. Both measures show the extent of electronic 

filing by individuals--one in absolute numbers, the other as a percent 

of total filings. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure 

performance results; Recommendations: See note 1 to table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of payments received 

electronically (millions); All individual and all business tax 

payments made through the electronic federal tax payment system 

(EFTPS); FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 64.4; Actual: 53.8; 

Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Some overlap with percent of 

payments received electronically. Both measures show the extent to 

which payments are received electronically--one in absolute numbers, 

the other as a percent of total receipts. Overlap could cloud the 

bottom line and obscure performance results; Recommendations: See note 

1 to table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Percent of payments received 

electronically; The percentage of all individual and business tax 

payments made through EFTPS; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 30%; 

Actual: not available[B]; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: 

Some overlap with number of payments received electronically. Both 

measures show the extent to which payments are received electronically-

-one in absolute numbers, the other as a percent of total receipts. 

Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure performance results; 

Recommendations: See note 1 to table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of electronic funds withdrawals/

credit card transactions (millions); The total number of credit card 

and direct debit payments processed through EFTPS; FY 2001 target and 

actual: Target: 1.0; Actual: 0.63; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Some overlap with number and percent of payments received 

electronically. The payments covered by this measure are included in 

the universe of payments covered by the other two measures. Overlap 

could cloud the bottom line and obscure performance results; 

Recommendations: See note 1 to table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of IRS digital daily Web site 

hits (billions); The number of hits to IRS’s Web site; FY 2001 

target and actual: Target: 2.0; Actual: 2.3; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: Measure is not clear and lacks reliability because, 

for example, initial access counts as multiple hits and movement 

throughout the Web site will count as additional hits; 

Recommendations: Either discontinue use of this measure or revise the 

way “hits” are calculated so that the measure more accurately reflects 

usage.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of downloads from “IRS .GOV” 

(millions); The total number of tax forms downloaded from IRS’s Web 

site; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 311; Actual: 309; 

Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None observed; 

Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Customer satisfaction - individual 

taxpayers; The percentage of taxpayers who respond “very satisfied” 

with individual E-file products; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 

76%; Actual: 83%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None 

observed; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Employee satisfaction - Electronic 

filing and assistance; The percentage of survey participants that 

answered with a 4 or 5 (two highest scores possible) to the question 

“considering everything, how satisfied are you with your job?”; FY 2001 

target and actual: Target: 66%; Actual: 38%; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: None observed; Recommendations: None.



Note: We identified this measure as having partial overlap with another 

measure. Electronic filing and assistance officials told us that each 

of the overlapping measures we identified provides additional 

information to managers. Determining whether or not to remove 

overlapping measures is management’s discretion.



[A] The names of some measures have been modified slightly from the 

official names used by IRS for ease of reading and consistency 

purposes. The definitions of the measures listed in the table come from 

various IRS sources, including interviews.



[B] Despite setting a target, actual data were not available because 

electronic filing and assistance did not begin tracking the measure 

until 2002.



Source: GAO comparison of IRS’s December 13, 2000, July 25, 2001, and 

October 29, 2001, Strategy and Program Plans with the attributes in 

appendix I.



[End of table]



Field Assistance Performance Measures:



Of the 53 performance measures in our review, 14 are for field 

assistance. Table 8 has information about each of the 14 field 

assistance measures.



Table 8: Field Assistance Performance Measures:



Measure name and definition[A]: Customer satisfaction; From surveys 

established in 1998, an index was created to represent overall customer 

satisfaction with field assistance services, with a “7” being the 

best.[B]; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 6.5 average score; 

Actual: 6.4 average score; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: 

None identified; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Return preparation contacts; Total 

number of customers assisted with tax return preparation, including 

electronic and non-electronic tax return preparation at taxpayer 

assistance centers (TAC); FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 979,206; 

; Actual: 1,009,387; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Name, 

definition, and formula of measure are not clear; Significant manual 

data collection process impedes reliability because of the potential 

for errors and inconsistencies that could affect the accuracy of the 

measure and conclusions about the extent to which performance goals 

have been achieved; Some overlap with return preparation units 

measure. Both measures attempt to show number of services provided, but 

the contact measure takes the number of taxpayers served into account 

and the units measure counts the number of returns prepared for those 

taxpayers served. Overlap could cloud the bottom line and obscure 

performance results; Recommendations: Make the name and/or definition 

of the measure more clear to indicate what is and is not included in 

the formula; See note 1 to the table; See note 2 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Geographic coverage; Percentage of 

W&I taxpayer population with distinct characteristics, behaviors, and 

needs for face-to-face assistance within a 45-minute commuting distance 

from a TAC; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 70%; Actual: 74%; 

Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Name, definition, and formula 

of measure are not clear; uncertainties exist among IRS officials about 

what is and is not included in the measure; The formula does not 

include all facilities, which could lead to misinterpreted results or a 

failure to properly identify alternative facility types to resolve 

access problems; Because the formula does not include all facilities, 

it is difficult for decision makers to determine if, when, and where 

additional TACs are needed; Recommendations: Make the name and/or 

definition of the measure more clear to indicate what is and is not 

included in the formula; Revise the formula to better reflect (1) 

the various types of field assistance facilities, including alternate 

sites and kiosks; (2) the types of services provided by each facility; 

and (3) the facility’s operating hours.



Measure name and definition[A]: Return preparation units; Actual 

number of tax returns prepared, in whole or in part, in a TAC or 

alternative site. (Multiple returns may be prepared for a single 

customer.); FY 2001 target and actual: Target: not available; Actual: 

not available; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Name, 
definition, 

and formula of measure are not clear; Target to be set upon completion 
of 

data collection.[C]; Significant manual data collection process impedes 

reliability because of the potential for errors and inconsistencies 
that 

could affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions about the 
extent 

to which performance goals have been achieved; Some overlap with return 

preparation contacts. Both measures attempt to show number of services 

provided, but the contact measure takes the number of taxpayers served 

into account and the units measure counts the number of returns 

prepared for those taxpayer’s served. Overlap could cloud the bottom 

line and obscure performance results; Recommendations: Make the name 

and/or definition of the measure more clear to indicate what is and is 

not included in the formula; See note 1 to the table; See note 2 

to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: TACs total contacts; Total number of 

customers assisted, including number of customers assisted with tax 

return preparation, at TACs and alternate sites and via mobile 

services. All face-to-face, telephone, and correspondence contacts are 

included; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 9,116,099; Actual: 

9,681,330; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Name, definition, 

and formula of measure are not clear; Significant manual data 

collection process impedes reliability because of the potential for 

errors and inconsistencies that could affect the accuracy of the 

measure and conclusions about the extent to which performance goals 

have been achieved; Recommendations: Make the name and/or definition 

of the measure more clear to indicate what is and is not included in 

the formula; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Forms contacts; Total number of 

customers actually assisted by employees at TACs, alternate sites, and 

via mobile services by (1) providing forms from stock or (2) using a 

CD-ROM; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 2,331,000; Actual: 

2,388,039; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Name, definition, 

and formula of measure are not clear; Significant manual data 

collection process impedes reliability because of the potential for 

errors and inconsistencies that could affect the accuracy of the 

measure and conclusions about the extent to which performance goals 

have been achieved; Recommendations: Make the name and/or definition 

of the measure more clear to indicate what is and is not included in 

the formula; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Tax law contacts; Total number of 

customers assisted in TACs, alternate sites, and via mobile services 

with inquiries involving general tax law questions, non-account related 

IRS procedures, preparation or review of Forms W-7, Individual Taxpayer 

Identification Number documentation verification or rejection, a form 

request where probing requiring technical tax law training takes place, 

and assisting customers with audit reconsideration; FY 2001 target and 

actual: Target: not available; Actual: 1,787,338; Weaknesses of 

measure and consequences: Name, definition, and formula of measure are 

not clear; Target to be set upon completion of data collection.[C]; 

Significant manual data collection process impedes reliability 

because of the potential for errors and inconsistencies that could 

affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions about the extent to 

which performance goals have been achieved; Recommendations: Make the 

name and/or definition of the measure more clear to indicate what is 

and is not included in the formula; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Account contacts; Total number of 

customers assisted in TACs, alternate sites, and via mobile services 

with inquiries involving account related inquiries including math error 

notices, Integrated Data Retrieval System work, payments not attached 

to a tax return, CP2000 inquiries, Individual Taxpayer Identification 

Number issues requiring account research, the issuance of Form 809 

receipts, and account related procedures; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: not available; Actual: not available; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: Name, definition, and formula of measure are not 

clear; Target to be set upon completion of data collection.[C]; 

Significant manual data collection process impedes reliability because 

of the potential for errors and inconsistencies that could affect the 

accuracy of the measure and conclusions about the extent to which 

performance goals have been achieved; Recommendations: Make the name 

and/or definition of the measure more clear to indicate what is and is 

not included in the formula; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Other contacts; Total number of 

customers assisted in TACs, alternate sites, and via mobile services 

with Form 2063, U.S. Departing Alien Income Tax statement, date 

stamping tax returns when the customer is present, non-receipt or 

incorrect W-2 inquiries, general information such as Service Center 

address and directions to other agencies; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: 3,869,000; Actual: 4,496,566; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Name, definition, and formula of measure are not clear; 

; Significant manual data collection process impedes reliability 

because of the potential for errors and inconsistencies that could 

affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions about the extent to 

which performance goals have been achieved; Recommendations: Make the 

name and/or definition of the measure more clear to indicate what is 

and is not included in the formula; See note 1 to the table.



Measure name and definition[A]: Tax law accuracy; The quality of 

service provided to TAC customers. Specifically, the accuracy of 

responses concerning issues involving tax law; FY 2001 target and 

actual: Target: not available; Actual: not available; Weaknesses of 

measure and consequences: Name, definition, and formula of measure are 

not clear; Target to be set upon completion of data collection.[C]; 

Recommendations: Make the name and/or definition of the measure more 

clear to indicate what is and is not included in the formula.



Measure name and definition[A]: Accounts/notices accuracy; The 

quality of service provided to TAC customers. Specifically, the 

accuracy of responses and/or IDRS transactions concerning issues 

involving account work and notices; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: not available; Actual: not available; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: Name, definition, and formula of measure are not 

clear; Target to be set upon completion of data collection.[C]; 

Recommendations: Make the name and/or definition of the measure more 

clear to indicate what is and is not included in the formula.



Measure name and definition[A]: Return preparation accuracy; The 

quality of service provided to TAC customers. Specifically, the 

accuracy of tax returns prepared in a TAC; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: not available; Actual: not available; Weaknesses of measure 

and consequences: Name, definition, and formula of measure are not 

clear; Target to be set upon completion of data collection.[C]; 

Recommendations: Make the name and/or definition of the measure more 

clear to indicate what is and is not included in the formula.



Measure name and definition[A]: Employee satisfaction; The percentage 

of survey participants that answered with a 4 or 5 (two highest scores 

possible) to the question “considering everything, how satisfied are 

you with your job.”; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 62%; 

Actual: 51%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None observed; 

Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Alternate contacts; Total number of 

customers assisted at kiosks, mobile units, and alternate sites. It 

includes all face-to-face (including return preparation), telephone, 

and correspondence contacts; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: not 

available; Actual: not available; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Target to be set upon completion of data collection.[C]; 

; Significant manual data collection process impedes reliability 

because of the potential for errors and inconsistencies that could 

affect the accuracy of the measure and conclusions about the extent to 

which performance goals have been achieved; Recommendations: See note 

1 to the table.



Note 1: IRS expects to minimize this potential for errors and 

inconsistency by equipping all of its TACS with an on-line automated 

tracking and reporting system known as the Queuing Management System 

(Q-Matic). This system is expected, among other things, to more 

efficiently monitor customer traffic flow and eliminate staff time 

spent completing Form 5311. Because IRS is in the process of 

implementing Q-Matic, we are not making any recommendation.



Note 2: We identified this measure as having partial overlap with 

another measure. Field assistance officials agreed with our assessment 

and stated that they plan to remove the “return preparation contacts” 

measure from the Strategy and Program Plan. The following 

recommendation applies to two measures, as noted in the table: “ensure 

that plans to remove overlapping measures are implemented.”:



[A] The names of some measures have been modified slightly from the 

official names used by IRS for ease of reading and consistency 

purposes. The definitions of the measures listed in the table come from 

various IRS sources, including interviews.



[B] Field assistance implemented a new customer satisfaction survey in 

fiscal year 2002. The index was changed, and a rating of “5” is now 

best.



[C] Although these measures did not have a measurable target in place, 

IRS is taking reasonable steps to develop a target.



Source: GAO comparison of IRS’s December 13, 2000, July 25, 2001, and 

October 29, 2001, Strategy and Program Plans with the attributes in 

appendix I.



[End of table]



Submission Processing Performance Measures:



Of the 53 performance measures in our review, 11 are for submission 

processing.[Footnote 45] Table 9 has information about each of the 11 

submission processing performance measures.



Table 9: Submission Processing Performance Measures:



Measure name and definition[A]: Individual 1040 series returns filed 

(paper)[B]; The number of Forms 1040, 1040A, and 1040EZ filed at 

the eight W&I submission processing centers; FY 2001 target and 

actual: Target: 87,869,000; Actual: 74,972,667; Weaknesses of 

measure and consequences: None observed; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Number of individual refunds issued 

(paper)[B]; The number of individual refunds issued by the eight 

W&I submission processing centers after the initial filing of a 

return; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 48,000,000; Actual: 

45,456,534; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None observed; 

Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Employee satisfaction; The 

percentage of survey participants that answered with a 4 or 5 (two 

highest scores possible) to the question “considering everything, how 

satisfied are you with your job.”; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 

60%; Actual: 54%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None 

observed; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Refund timeliness - individual 

(paper)[B]; The percentage of refunds issued to taxpayers within 40 

days of the date IRS received the individual income tax return; FY 

2001 target and actual: Target: 96.1%; Actual: 96.75%; Weaknesses 

of measure and consequences: Potential reliability weakness because 

data collected manually and evaluations of data based on judgment. 

Possible inconsistencies affect the accuracy of the measure and 

conclusions about the extent to which performance goals have been 

achieved; Recommendations: Based on the results of effectiveness 

studies, establish goals to improve consistency, as needed.



Measure name and definition[A]: Notice error rate; The percentage of 

incorrect submission processing master file notices issued to taxpayers 

(includes systemic errors).[C]; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 

8.1%; Actual: 14.84%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: 

Potential reliability weakness because data collected manually and 

evaluations of data based on judgment. Possible inconsistencies affect 

the objectivity of the measure and conclusions about the extent to 

which performance goals have been achieved; Recommendations: Based on 

the results of effectiveness studies, establish goals to improve 

consistency, as needed.



Measure name and definition[A]: Refund error rate - individual 

(paper)[B]; The percentage of refunds that have errors caused by IRS 

involving, for example, a person’s name or refund amount (includes 

systemic errors).[C]; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 13.6%; 

Actual: 9.75%; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Potential 

reliability weakness because data collected manually and evaluations of 

data based on judgment. Possible inconsistencies affect the accuracy of 

the measure and conclusions about the extent to which performance goals 

have been achieved; Recommendations: Based on the results of 

effectiveness studies, establish goals to improve consistency, as 

needed.



Measure name and definition[A]: Letter error rate; The percentage of 

letters with errors issued to taxpayers by submission processing 

employees (includes systemic errors).[C]; FY 2001 target and actual: 

Target: 11.9%; Actual: 13.10%; Weaknesses of measure and 

consequences: Potential reliability weakness because data collected 

manually and evaluations of data based on judgment. Possible 

inconsistencies affect the objectivity of the measure and conclusions 

about the extent to which performance goals have been achieved; 

Recommendations: Based on the results of effectiveness studies, 

establish goals to improve consistency, as needed.



Measure name and definition[A]: Deposit timeliness (paper)[B]; Lost 

opportunity cost of money received by IRS but not deposited in the bank 

by the next day, per $1 billion of deposits, using a constant 8% annual 

interest rate; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: $746,712; 

Actual: $878,867; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None 

observed; Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Deposit error rate; The percentage of 

payments misapplied based on the taxpayer’s intent; FY 2001 target and 

actual: Target: 4.9%; Actual: not available[D]; Weaknesses of 

measure and consequences: Objectivity weakness because sampling plan 

not consistently implemented; Potential reliability weakness because 

data collected manually and evaluations of data based on judgment. 

Possible inconsistencies affect the accuracy of the measure and 

conclusions about the extent to which performance goals have been 

achieved; Recommendations: See note 1 to the table; Based on the 

results of effectiveness studies, establish goals to improve 

consistency, as needed.



Measure name and definition[A]: Refund interest paid (per $1 million of 

refunds); The amount of refund interest paid per $1 million of 

refunds issued; FY 2001 target and actual: Target: $112; Actual: 

$128.63; Weaknesses of measure and consequences: None observed; 

Recommendations: None.



Measure name and definition[A]: Submission processing productivity; 

The weighted workload or work units processed per staff year expended; 

FY 2001 target and actual: Target: 28,787; Actual: 28,537; 

Weaknesses of measure and consequences: Not clear because (1) 

definition is not clearly stated, (2) managers do not understand their 

unit’s contribution to the formula and (3) unit managers do not use the 

measure to assess performance; Recommendations: Revise the measure so 

it provides more meaningful information to users.



Note 1: We are not making a recommendation regarding the objectivity 

weakness for the “deposit error rate” measure because the Treasury 

Inspector General for Tax Administration recommended that IRS take 

steps to ensure that the sampling plan is being implemented 

consistently, and IRS reported that steps have been taken. :



[A] The names of some measures have been modified slightly from the 

official names used by IRS for ease of reading and consistency 

purposes. The definitions of the measures listed in the table come from 

various IRS sources, including interviews.



[B] “Paper” means that returns filed electronically (or their resulting 

refunds) are not included in the measure.



[C] A systemic error is an error caused by a computer programming error 

as opposed to an IRS employee.



[End of table]



[D] IRS could not provide actual data on this measure due to 

discrepancies in its data.



Source: GAO comparison of IRS’s December 13, 2000, July 25, 2001, and 

October 29, 2001, Strategy and Program Plans with the attributes in 

appendix I.



[End of section]



Appendix III: Comments from the Internal Revenue Service:



Note: GAO comments supplementing those in the report text appear at the 

end of this appendix.



DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE

WASHINGTON, D.C. 

20224:



November 1, 2002:



Mr. James R. White, Director, Tax Issues, U.S. General Accounting 
Office 

441 G Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20548:



Dear Mr. White:



I appreciate your recognition of the substantial progress we have made 

in implementing our balanced measures and our strategic planning 

process. We issued our first Strategy and Program Plan (SPP) and 

performance measures in Fiscal Year (FY) 2000, which I believe was 

great progress in a short period of time. We continue to gain 

experience and focus on the key attributes of performance measures as 

we use them in our day-to-day operations. Your observation that this is 

an ongoing process is exactly on point. The observations of your staff 

will benefit us as we continue to improve our performance measures. I 

believe your report is an insightful review of the measures we 

developed for use in FY 2001. We recently completed our SPP and the 

related performance measures for FYs 2003-2004. We will consider your 

suggestions as we review our current plan and develop plans for our 

next SPP cycle.



I am particularly impressed with the detailed definitions, 

explanations, and examples your staff developed for the nine attributes 

of successful performance measures. I believe the Wage and Investment 

(W&I) Division can use these standards as a helpful checklist when they 

develop future performance measures.



I also was pleased to note your observation that our measures had many 

of the attributes for successful performance. This indicates that we 

appropriately developed and properly targeted key performance measures. 

I also agree the measures that did not satisfy all of the attributes 

will give us opportunities for further refinement rather than 

invalidate their overall value. As you noted, we have several 

initiatives underway to continue improving these measures. Overall, 

your report is objective and balanced.



I want to share some additional points for your consideration:



*Although the filing season is our busiest and most visible period, our 

performance measures are for the entire fiscal year.



*The report is focused on the performance measures and their 

relationship to the SPP without any mention of the importance of the 

Operating Units’ Business Plans. The Business Plan is a derivative of 

the SPP that is linked to tactical actions, resource allocations, and 

performance milestones that drive the day-today activities and goals 

of the Operating Units. The Business Plan is the primary vehicle for 

accountability through the Business Performance Review Process and 

individual performance appraisals.



*Few of our performance measures are isolated measures. No individual 

measures can adequately reflect the broad range of our responsibilities 

and our mission. We manage our programs by reviewing performance 

measures, diagnostic measures, performance indicators, and numerous 

other data sources to ensure a broad perspective of our service to our 

customers.



I have addressed the recommendations in more detail below:



Recommendations for Executive Action:



We recommend that the Commissioner of Internal Revenue Service direct 

the appropriate officials to do the following:



Recommendation 1:



Take steps to ensure that the agencywide goals clearly align with the 

operating division goals and performance measures for each of the four 

areas reviewed. Specifically, (1) clearly document the relationship 

among agencywide goals, operating division goals, and performance 

measures (the other three program areas may want to consider developing 

a template similar to the one Field Assistance developed, shown in 

figure 4) and (2) ensure that the relationship among goals and measures 

is communicated to staff at all levels of the organization.



Response:



We agree with this recommendation and in the next SPP, we will review 

the performance measures for the four W&I areas to ensure that we align 

and document their relationship to operating division goals and 

agencywide goals. The Operating Units’ Business Plans communicate the 

relationship of SPP goals and measures throughout the organization. 

Staff at all levels should recognize their role in delivering the 

Business Plan. The four program areas reviewed in the W&I Division 

distributed information on the SPP and Business Plan through annual 

leadership conferences at each site for FYs 2002 and 2003.



Recommendation 2:



Make the name and definition of several field assistance measures 

(i.e., “geographic coverage,” “return preparation contacts,” “return 

preparation units,” “TACs total contacts,” “forms contacts,” “tax law 

contacts,” “account contacts,” “other contacts,” “tax law accuracy,” 

“account/notice accuracy,” and “return preparation accuracy”) more 
clear 

to indicate what is and is not included in the formula.



Response:



Field Assistance recently updated the data dictionary for FY 2003. The 

updated dictionary addresses your recommendation on clarity and 

specifically identifies what is or is not included in the formulas. We 

gave a copy of the updated document to your staff. We have updated the 

data dictionary to include the purpose of the performance measurement, 

the data limitations associated with data gathering of the measure, and 

calculation changes from the prior year. It also provides a complete 

description of the methodology used in capturing the data, the critical 

path of how the measure originates and moves through the process, and 

the level of reviews to ensure quality. Field Assistance uses the 

current data dictionary in reporting measures to all levels of the 

organization.



Recommendation 3:



As discussed in the body of this report and in appendix II, modify the 

formulas used to compute various measures to improve clarity. If 

formulas cannot be implemented in time for the next issuance of the 

SPP, then modify the name and definition of the following measures so 

it is clearer what is or is not included in the measure.



Recommendation 3(a):



Remove automated calls from the formula for the “CSR level of service” 

measure.



Response:



We published the definition of this measure in the SPP, Data 

Dictionary, Measures Matrix, and numerous other sources. We believe 

that including the count of callers who choose an automated service 

while waiting for CSR service is appropriate. The formula accurately 

reflects the percentage of customers that wanted to speak to a CSR and 

subsequently received service. While we are promoting the use of 

automated services as an alternative to CSR service, we expect 

increases to occur before a customer enters the CSR queue. The growth 

in automation service while in queue for CSR service should remain 

small or decrease. We do not believe that this measure merits further 

change.



Recommendation 3(b):



Revise the “CSR response level” measure to include calls from taxpayers 

who tried to reach a CSR but did not, such as those who (1) hung up 

while waiting to speak to a CSR, (2) were provided access only to 

automated services and hung up, and (3) received a busy signal.



Response:



We do not agree that we should modify this measure. The methodology and 

30 second threshold for this measure is in accordance with the industry 

standard. This measure only applies to services answered and should not 

include abandon calls, automated service disconnects, or busy signals. 

Altering this measure would deviate from the industry standards and 

hinder our ability to gauge success in meeting this “world class 

service” goal.



Recommendation 3(c):



Analyze and use new or existing data to determine why calls are 

transferred and use the data to revise the “CSR services provided” 

measure so that it only reflects transferred calls in which the caller 

received help from more than one CSR (i.e., exclude calls in which a 

CSR simply transferred the call and did not provide service.):



Response:



We agree in concept with your recommendation. We are continuing to 

examine previously collected data on transferred calls from FY 2002. We 

are also studying the anticipated impact that our new Toll Free 

Operating Strategy will have on this measure. We specifically designed 

this strategy to simplify the scripts and telephone menus to make the 

customer’s self-selection process easier and more efficient. After 

assessing the impact of the Toll Free Operating Strategy, we will then 

review the recommendation for possible change in FY 2004.



Recommendation 3(d):



Either discontinue use of the “number of IRS digital daily Web site 

hits” measure or revise the way “hits” are calculated so that the 

measure more accurately reflects usage.



Response:



Due to privacy restrictions associated with the use of “cookies,” we 

cannot track the actual web site use. Instead, for FY 2003, we will 

implement three new diagnostic indicators related to the web site. 

These indicators (page view, unique visitors, and visits) will give us 

additional information to track the system performance and gauge the 

traffic on the web site. We will monitor these indicators for a year 

and decide whether to include them as performance measures in the 2004-

2005 SPP.



We will also continue to measure the number of hits and downloads to 

the web site. However, we will clarify the definition of “hits” to 

reflect that each file requested by a visitor registers as a hit and 

several hits can occur on each page.



Recommendation 3(e):



Revise Field Assistance’s “geographic coverage” measure by ensuring 

that the formula better reflects (1) the various types of field 

assistance facilities, including alternate sites and kiosks; (2) the 

types of services provided by each facility; and (3) the facility’s 

operating hours.



Response:



We agree that we should have revised the geographic coverage 

description to include more than just Taxpayer Assistance Centers 

(TAC).We are working with representatives from the Office of Program 

Evaluation and Risk Analysis to modify the formula to ensure that the 

formula reflects the appropriate elements by June 30, 2003. In 

addition, we will use the model to assist in determining the locations 

for different delivery options.



Recommendation 3(f):



Revise Submission Processing’s “productivity” measure so it provides 

more meaningful information to users.



Response:



We recognize that this measure needs improvement. The broad range of 

returns and documents processed and numerous other variables that can 

impact efficiency drives the complexity of the measure. The current 

measure seeks to account for those differences to ensure equity and 

fairness in the measurement process. We have looked at alternative ways 

to measure productivity but have not found a suitable replacement for 

this measure. We will continue our efforts to develop a more meaningful 

productivity measurement.



Recommendation 4:



Refrain from making changes to official targets, such as Electronic 

Filing and Assistance did in FY 2001, unless extenuating circumstances 

arise. Disclose any extenuating circumstances in the SPP and other key 

documents.



Response:



We agree that we should only make changes to official targets under the 

circumstances you describe and that disclosing these changes is 

appropriate. This approach is consistent with our overall practice.



Recommendation 5:



Modify procedures for the toll-free customer satisfaction survey, 

possibly by requiring that the administrators listen to the entire 

call, to better ensure that the administrators (1) notify CSRs that 

their call was selected for the survey as close to the end of the call

as possible and (2) can accurately answer the questions they are 

responsible for on the survey.



Response:



We agree we can improve this process. We will instruct the 

administrators to listen to each call from its beginning to as close to 

the conclusion as practical. Formalizing this practice will also enable 

the administrators to accurately answer the questions on the survey.



Recommendation 6:



Implement annual effectiveness studies to validate the accuracy of the 

data collection methods used for the five telephone measures (“toll-

free tax law quality,” “toll-free accounts quality,” “toll-free tax law 

correct response rate,” “toll-free account correct response rate,” and 

“toll-free timeliness”) subject to potential consistency problems. The 

studies could determine the extent to which variation exists in 

collecting data and recognize the associated impact on the affected 

measures. For those measures, and for the five Submission Processing 

measures that already have effectiveness studies in place (“refund 

timeliness-individual (paper),” “notice error rate,” “refund error 

rateindividual (paper),” “letter error rate,” and “deposit error 

rate”), IRS should establish goals for improving consistency, as 

needed.



Response:



We have ongoing processes to ensure that we properly administer the 

collection methods for the five telephone measures to minimize 

potential consistency problems. We do not agree that an annual 

independent review by a non-CQRS analyst is merited. Members of the 

Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) perform 

indepth oversight activities annually covering these collection 

methods. While we will work to improve consistency, we do not agree 

that we should incorporate a consistency improvement goal in the SPP 

process.



Recommendation 7:



Ensure that plans to remove overlapping measures in Telephone and Field 

Assistance are implemented.



Response:



We will continue our process of reviewing measures identified as 

overlapping and deleted those that truly were redundant.



Recommendation 8:



As discussed in the body of this report, include the following missing 

measures in the SPP in order to better cover governmentwide priorities 

and achieve balance.



Recommendation 8(a):



In the spirit of provisions in the Chief Financial Officer’s Act of 

1990 and Financial Accounting Standards Number 4, develop a cost of 

services measure using the best information currently available for 

each of the four areas discussed in this report, recognizing data 

limitations as prescribed by GPRA. In doing so, adhere to guidance, 

such as Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76, and consider 

seeking outside counsel to determine best or industry practices.



Response:



Development of cost of services measures for Telephone Assistance, 

Electronic Filing and Assistance, Field Assistance, and Submission 

Processing is dependent on Servicewide deployment of the Integrated 

Financial System (IFS). The first release of IFS, scheduled for October 

2003, will facilitate financial reporting and financial audits. The 

second release of IFS, planned for March 2005, will include Property 

and Performance Management. At this time, the development of cost of 

services measures is directly linked to having a mechanism that 

provides cost information for performance activities. The Service is 

moving towards this goal with successful implementation of the IFS 

system.



Recommendation 8(b):



Given the importance of automated telephone assistance, develop a 

customer satisfaction survey and measure for automated assistance.



Response:



We agree that measuring customer satisfaction with automated services 

is important. Our newer interactive Internet services have satisfaction 

surveys incorporated in the program. We are continuing to upgrade our 

automated services and will be implementing telephone system 

architectural changes as part of the Customer Communications 

Engineering Study. We will review your recommendation to evaluate the 

benefit of programming and implementing a customer satisfaction survey 

system based on outdated delivery systems.



Recommendation 8(c):



Put the “automated completion rate” measure back in the SPP after 

revising the formula so that calls for recorded tax information are not 

counted as completed when taxpayers hang up before receiving service.



Response:



We continue to track and monitor the “automated completion rate” as a 

diagnostic measure.We do not plan to modify the formula nor do we 

intend to reinstate it as a measure in the SPP.



Recommendation 8(d):



Add one or more quality measures to Electronic Filing and Assistance’s 

suite of measures in the SPP.Possible measures include “processing 

accuracy,” “refund timeliness, electronically filed,” and “number of 

electronic returns rejected.”:



Response:



The quality of electronic filing has consistently been high due to the 

pre-submission checks integrated into the system. We do track and 

monitor numerous diagnostic indicators that reflect the quality of 

electronic filing. We use this data to determine if there are error 

trends that need to be addressed. We do not believe incorporating these 

indicators as a performance measure in the SPP would enhance the 

electronic filing program.



Recommendation 8(e):



Re-implement Field Assistance’s timeliness measure.



Response:



Field Assistance agrees that timeliness goals are important in 

providing service to taxpayers; however, we found that this is 

detrimental to quality service in TACs because the employees tend to 

rush the customers when traffic is high. Realistic expectations provide 

a framework for our workers to provide appropriate service to the 

taxpayer with the goal of taking the requisite time to provide complete 

and accurate assistance. We will continue to use positive and negative 

feedback from customers responding to the “promptness of service” 

section of the satisfaction survey as a gauge of service. In addition, 

we are still tracking wait-times in locations equipped with the Queuing 

Management System (Q-Matic) System. The Q-Matic System is an on-line 

automated tracking and reporting system. We agree errors occur when 

manual methods of tracking workload volume and staff hours are used. In 

order to minimize reporting errors and better track wait-time, we plan 

to equip all of our TACs with this system.We can have Q-Matic installed 

and networked at all TACs nationwide by the end of FY 2004 with the 

planned funding.



Recommendation 8(j):



Develop a measure that provides information about Field Assistance’s 

efficiency.



Response:



Field Assistance is implementing a performance monitoring system to 

monitor productivity measures. We will use this system as a diagnostic 

tool to identify organizational performance measures strengths and 

weaknesses and not as an evaluative tool as we are a Section 1204 

organization. We will test the system during FY 2003 to determine the 

validity and usefulness of the data captured. At the end of the fiscal 

year, we will decide whether to continue with the current system, or 

modify it.



Again, I appreciate your observations and recommendations. If you have 

questions or comments, please call Floyd Williams, Director, 

Legislative Affairs, at (202) 622-3720.



Sincerely,



Charles O. Rossotti



Signed by Charles O. Rossotti



1. We recognize that IRS’s performance measures cover entire fiscal

 years. We reviewed 53 of the measures for all of fiscal year 2001, 

 and we reported the full year’s results in appendix II.



2. We reviewed the business plans for all four program areas we 

 reviewed. Although we did not comment specifically about the 

 business performance review process in the report, we noted in the 

 background and field assistance sections that the business plans 

 communicate part of the relationship among the various goals and 

 measures.



3. Figure 4 shows an excerpt of field assistance’s business unit plan. 

 As noted in the figure, the template used to communicate the 

 relationship between goals and measure is missing some key 

 components. Figure 2 is our attempt to show the complete relationship 

 among IRS’s various goals and measures--it is based on multiple 

 documents.



[End of section]



Appendix IV: GAO Contacts and Staff Acknowledgments:



GAO Contacts:



James White (202) 512-9110:



Dave Attianese (202) 512-9110:



Acknowledgments:



In addition to those named above, Bob Arcenia, Healther Bothwell, Rudy 

Chatlos, Grace Coleman, Evan Gilman, Ron Heisterkamp, Ronald Jones, 

John Lesser, Allen Lomax, Theresa Mechem, Libby Mixon, Susan Ragland, 

Meg Skiba, Joanna Stamatiades, and Caroline Villanueva made key 

contributions to this report.



[End of section]



Bibliography:



To determine whether the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS) performance 

goals and measures in four key program areas demonstrate results, are 

limited to the vital few, cover multiple program priorities, and 

provide useful information in decision making, we developed attributes 

of performance goals and measures. These attributes were largely based 

on previously established criteria found in prior GAO reports; our 

review of key legislation, such as the Government Performance and 

Results Act of 1993 (GPRA) and the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 

1998; and other performance management literature. Sources we referred 

to for this report follow.



101st Congress. Chief Financial Officer’s Act of 1990. P.L. 101-576. 

Washington, D.C.: January 23, 1990.



103rd Congress. Government Performance and Result Act of 1993. P.L. 

103-62. Washington, D.C.: January 5, 1993.



103rd U.S. Senate. The Senate Committee on Government Affairs GPRA 

Report. Report 103-58. Washington, D.C.: June 16, 1993.



105th Congress. IRS Restructuring and Reform Act. P.L. 105-206. 

Washington, D.C.: July 22, 1998.



Internal Revenue Service. Managing Statistics in a Balanced Measures 

System. Handbook 105.4. Washington, D.C.: October 1, 2000.



The National Partnership for Reinventing Government. Balancing 

Measures: Best Practices in Performance Management. Washington, D.C.: 

August 1, 1999.



Office of Management and Budget, Preparation and Submission of Budget 

Estimates. Circular No. A-11, Revised. Transmittal Memorandum No. 72. 

Washington, D.C.: July 12, 1999.



Office of Management and Budget. Circular A-76, Revised. Supplemental 

Handbook, Performance of Commercial Activities. Washington, D.C.: March 

1996 (Revised 1999).



Office of Management and Budget. Managerial Cost Accounting Concepts 

and Standards for the Federal Government. Statement of Federal 

Financial Accounting Standards, Number 4. Washington, D.C.: July 31, 

1995:



[End of section]



Related Products:



U.S. General Accounting Office. Internal Revenue Service: Assessment of 

Budget Request for Fiscal Year 2003 and Interim Results of 2002 Tax 

Filing Season. (GAO-02-580T). Washington, D.C.: April 9, 2002.



U.S. General Accounting Office. Tax Administration: Assessment of IRS’s 

2001 Tax Filing Season. (GAO-02-144). Washington, D.C.: December 21, 

2001.



U.S. General Accounting Office. Human Capital: Practices That Empowered 

and Involved Employees (GAO-01-1070). Washington, D.C.: September 14, 

2001.



U.S. General Accounting Office. Managing For Results: Emerging Benefits 

From Selected Agencies’ Use of Performance Agreements (GAO-01-115). 

Washington, D.C.: October 30, 2000.



U.S. General Accounting Office. Agency Performance Plans: Examples of 

Practices That Can Improve Usefulness to Decisionmakers (GAO/GGD/AIMD-

99-69). Washington, D.C.: February 26,1999.



U.S. General Accounting Office. The Results Act: An Evaluator’s Guide 

to Assessing Agency Annual Performance Plans (GAO/GGD-10.1.20). 

Washington, D.C.: April 1,1998.



U.S. General Accounting Office. Executive Guide: Effectively 

Implementing the Government Performance and Results Act (GAO/GGD-96-

118). Washington, D.C.: June 1996.



U.S. General Accounting Office. Executive Guide: Improving Mission 

Performance Through Strategic Information Management and Technology 

(GAO/AIMD-94-115). Washington, D.C.: May 1, 1994.



FOOTNOTES



[1] Although April 15 is generally considered the end of the filing 

season, millions of taxpayers get extensions from IRS that allow them 

to delay filing until as late as October 15.



[2] IRS tracks its performance in providing filing season-related 

telephone service through mid-July instead of April because it receives 

many filing season-related calls after April 15 from taxpayers who are 

inquiring about the status of their refunds or responding to notices 

they received from IRS related to returns they filed. 



[3] Some earlier work includes U.S. General Accounting Office, 

Executive Guide: Effectively Implementing the Government Performance 

and Results Act, GAO/GGD-96-118 (Washington, D.C.: June 1996) and U.S. 

General Accounting Office, The Results Act: An Evaluator’s Guide to 

Assessing Agency Annual Performance Plans, GAO/GGD-10.1.20 

(Washington, D.C.: Apr. 1998).



[4] The four characteristics are overarching, thus there is not 

necessarily a direct link between any one attribute and any one 

characteristic.



[5] U.S. General Accounting Office, Internal Revenue Service: 

Assessment of Budget Request for Fiscal Year 2003 and Interim Results 

of 2002 Tax Filing Season, GAO-02-580T (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 9, 

2002).



[6] GPRA, P.L. 103-62, was enacted to hold federal agencies accountable 

for achieving program results. IRS’s balanced measurement system is 

consistent with the intent of GPRA.



[7] IRS’s Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998, P.L. 105-206, was 

enacted on July 22, 1998, and calls for broad reforms in areas such as 

the structure and management of IRS, electronic filing, and taxpayer 

protection and rights.



[8] The other components include revamped business practices, customer-

focused operating divisions, management roles with clear 

responsibility, and new technology.



[9] As part of IRS’s reorganization that took effect in October 2000, 

IRS established four operating divisions that serve specific groups of 

taxpayers. The four divisions are (1) Wage and Investment, (2) Small 

Business and Self-Employed, (3) Large and Mid-Size Businesses, and (4) 

Tax Exempt and Government Entities.



[10] The Strategy and Program Plans we used in our analysis had actual 

performance information for part of the current fiscal year and 

planning information for the current and two subsequent fiscal years. 

An IRS manager said the agency plans to stop including actual 

information in Strategy and Program Plans prepared after fiscal year 

2002.



[11] GAO/GGD-96-118.



[12] Office of Management and Budget, Preparation and Submission of 

Budget Estimates, Circular No. A-11, Revised. Transmittal Memorandum 

No. 72 (Washington, D.C.: 

July 12, 1999).



[13] IRS, Managing Statistics in a Balanced Measures System, Handbook 

105.4 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 1, 2000).



[14] The data dictionary is an IRS document that provides information 

on performance measures, such as the measure’s name, description, and 

methodology.



[15] IRS deleted its “automated completion rate” measure in the 2002 

Strategy and Program Plan and now has 14 telephone measures. However, 

IRS still tracks that measure. 



[16] There were about 30 million of these calls during in fiscal year 

2001, which can have a significant impact on the “CSR response level” 

measure. 



[17] CSRs answer about 24 percent of all incoming calls. 



[18] As of January 2002, there were 53 quality reviewers in the 

Centralized Quality Review Site: 26 for tax law inquiries, 20 for 

account inquiries, and 7 others.



[19] CQRS is responsible for monitoring the accuracy of telephone 

assistance. It produces various reports that show call sites what 

errors CSRs are making so site managers can take action to reduce those 

errors.



[20] IRS significantly modified its five quality measures beginning in 

October 2002 based on the results of its initiative, which was aimed at 

redesigning the way IRS measures quality to better capture the 

taxpayer’s experience. Specifically, IRS renamed the toll-free correct 

response rate measures for tax law and account inquiries to “customer 

accuracy” for tax law or account inquiries. Plans call for the tax 

quality measures for tax law and account inquiries to be discontinued, 

but reported in fiscal year 2003 for trending and comparative purposes. 

IRS also eliminated the “toll-free timeliness” measure and replaced it 

with a new “quality timeliness” measure. Finally, IRS implemented a new 

measure called “professionalism.”



[21] The Chief Financial Officer’s Act, P.L. 101-576,underscores the 

importance of improving financial management in the federal government. 

Among other things, it calls for developing and reporting cost 

information.



[22] Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standard Number 4, 

“Managerial Cost Accounting Concepts and Standards for the Federal 

Government,” is aimed at providing reliable and timely information on 

the full cost of federal programs, their activities, and outputs.



[23] The Annual Performance Plan is a key document IRS produces each 

year to comply with the requirements of GPRA. It highlights a limited 

number of IRS performance measures.



[24] U.S. General Accounting Office, Tax Administration: Assessment of 

IRS’s 2001 Tax Filing Season, GAO-02-144 (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 21, 

2001).



[25] 1040 series returns are individual income tax returns filed on 

Forms 1040, 1040A, and 1040EZ.



[26] The masterfile is the system where most of IRS’s taxpayer data 

resides. 



[27] “Processing accuracy” refers to the total number of returns that 

do not go to the error resolution system. Transactions that fail 

validity checks during processing are corrected through the error 

resolution system. 



[28] “Refund timeliness, electronically filed” is the amount of time it 

takes for taxpayers to receive their refunds when filing 

electronically.



[29] Electronic returns can be rejected, for example, if taxpayers fail 

to include required Social Security numbers. IRS requires taxpayers to 

correct such errors before it will accept their electronic returns.



[30] Alternate sites are staffed with field assistance employees and 

offer limited face-to-face services, such as preparing returns and 

distributing forms. Field assistance has about 

50 alternate sites, such as temporary sites in shopping malls and 

libraries. Alternate sites are currently not included in the 

“geographic coverage” measure. 



[31] Kiosks are automated machines that taxpayers can use to obtain 

certain forms, answers to frequently asked questions, and general IRS 

information in English and Spanish. Kiosks are currently not included 

in the “geographic coverage” measure.



[32] The Resources Management Information System is the primary 

management information system that field assistance uses to track 

workload volume and staff hour expenditures.



[33] GAO-02-144.



[34] Of about 420 TACs, 123 had Q-Matic as of June 2002. IRS officials 

stated that installation and networking of Q-Matic in all offices is 

scheduled to be complete by September 30, 2005. In the meantime, IRS 

plans to pilot an installed and networked Q-Matic system in all the 

TACs that are located in one of IRS’s seven management areas during the 

first quarter of 2003.



[35] Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, Walk-in 

Customer Satisfaction Survey Results Should Be Qualified If Used for 

the GPRA, 2000-10-079 (Washington, D.C.: May 17, 2000).



[36] The number of units would generally be larger than the number of 

contacts. For example, if a taxpayer received help in preparing his or 

her return and his or her child’s return, field assistance would count 

that service as one return preparation contact and two return 

preparation units.



[37] TACs monitor timeliness, but IRS does not report the measure in 

the Strategy and Program Plan.



[38] The Integrated Submission and Remittance Processing System is the 

system IRS uses to process tax returns and remittances.



[39] Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, The Internal 

Revenue Service Needs to Improve Oversight of Remittance Processing 

Operations, 2003-40-002 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 7, 2002).



[40] Submission processing did have some data related to the average 

direct labor cost to process some paper returns in 1999. 



[41] Q-Matic is an automated tracking and reporting system that is 

expected to more efficiently monitor customer traffic flow and wait 

times and eliminate staff time completing Form 5311. Of about 420 TACs, 

123 had Q-Matic as of June 2002.



[42] An alternative form of measurement may be either (1) separate, 

descriptive statements of a minimally effective program or (2) a 

successful program, expressed with sufficient precision and in such 

terms that would allow for an accurate, independent determination to be 

made of how actual performance compares with the goals stated. An 

example would be the polio vaccine and how its value to society is 

judged by experts through a peer review.



[43] IRS deleted its “automated completion rate” measure in the 2002 

Strategy and Program Plan and now has only 14 telephone measures. 

However, IRS still tracks this measure.



[44] IRS has since added three measures (“number of information returns 

filed by magnetic tape,” “percent of information returns filed by 

magnetic tape,” and “customer satisfaction-business”) that were not 

part of our review. In addition, electronic filing and assistance is 

developing new performance measures and goals because it is in the 

midst of a major reorganization. When the reorganization is completed, 

electronic filing and assistance will no longer be responsible for all 

the operational programs for which it was responsible in 2001 and 2002. 

Electronic filing and assistance will remain responsible for strategic 

services, Internet development services, and development services. The 

IRS organizations assuming responsibility for electronic filing and 

assistance’s operational programs will be responsible for the related 

performance measures and goals.



[45] IRS is developing a measure of customer satisfaction for 

submission processing.



GAO’s Mission:



The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, 

exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 

responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability 

of the federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use 

of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides 

analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make 

informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to 

good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, 

integrity, and reliability.



Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony:



The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no 

cost is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains 

abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony and an 

expanding archive of older products. The Web site features a search 

engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You 

can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other 

graphics.



Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and 

correspondence. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its 

Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document 

files. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to 

www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to daily E-mail alert for newly 

released products” under the GAO Reports heading.



Order by Mail or Phone:



The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 

each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent 

of Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or 

more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. 

Orders should be sent to:



U.S. General Accounting Office



441 G Street NW,



Room LM Washington,



D.C. 20548:



To order by Phone: 	

Voice: (202) 512-6000:

TDD: (202) 512-2537:

Fax: (202) 512-6061:



To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs:



Contact:



Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov



Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470:



Public Affairs:



Jeff Nelligan, managing director, NelliganJ@gao.gov (202) 512-4800 U.S.



General Accounting Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149 Washington, D.C.



20548:

