Debbie Rivera
Headquarters, Washington                               Aug. 7, 2001
(Phone: 202/358-1743)

Dwayne Brown
Headquarters, Washington
(Phone: 202/358-1726)

Ben Mason
Dreamtime, Houston
(Phone: 281/483-1158)

RELEASE: 01-158

FIRST NASA/DREAMTIME HIGH TECH CAMERA WILL SOAR TO SPACE STATION

     NASA will take a giant leap for humankind when the first 
commercially provided and flight-certified high definition 
television (HDTV) camera, which will provide more visual clarity of 
space activities, rides aboard Space Shuttle Discovery to become a 
permanent resident on the International Space Station. Discovery is 
currently scheduled for launch on Aug. 9.

High tech cameras and equipment are a prime benefit of the 
multimedia agreement between NASA and Dreamtime Holdings, Inc., 
Mountain View, CA. NASA partnered with Dreamtime on May 17, 2000, 
to collaborate on a variety of multimedia-related services and 
products.

The partnership, in response to the Commercial Space Act of 1998, 
is officially termed "The NASA/Dreamtime Agreement for the 
Collaboration on Multimedia" and was negotiated to maximize NASA's 
existing multimedia assets and enhance the agency's television 
infrastructure. 

"This will be the beginning of a return on the NASA/Dreamtime 
investment," said Joe Rothenberg, NASA Associate Administrator for 
Space Flight. "It marks a big milestone on the road to telling the 
NASA story in a new and different way."

This HDTV camera will provide high resolution images for 
documentation of space activities and for enhancement of data 
collected by NASA scientists, researchers and engineers conducting 
experiments. Imagery will be accessible to the news media and to 
the general public through the Internet and other distribution 
methods.

The camera hardware includes a Sony HDW-700A HDTV camera, telephoto 
lens, wide-angle lens, battery packs and tapes. The accompanying 
batteries can be recharged in orbit, enabling continuous 
documentation of station activities.

Although HDTV cameras have flown aboard other space shuttle 
missions, the NASA/Dreamtime camera is the first to go through 
flight certification for the International Space Station. This 
process also makes this the first commercially certified HDTV 
camera, that is, certified at no cost to the taxpayer.

"Our partner, Lockheed Martin, did an incredible job developing new 
systems to certify the camera in record time," said Bill Foster, 
CEO of Dreamtime. "Images from this camera have five times the 
clarity of a standard digital camera. Not only will it be able to 
document space from a new perspective, it also will allow our 
partners to record in real time the science of space."

HDTV cameras and equipment both for on-orbit installation and use 
at NASA Field Centers are among many benefits Dreamtime expects to 
deliver. In addition, the partnership, through Dreamtime efforts, 
will digitize a significant portion of NASA imagery and create a 
multimedia database that will allow greater public access to basic 
research capabilities and free downloads of low resolution versions 
of those images. It also will help enhance public awareness of NASA 
by developing documentaries and educational programming for 
television broadcast.

                               -end-

