Charles Redmond
NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.                March 14, 1989

James Hartsfield
Johnson Space Center, Houston


RELEASE: 89-

DISCOVERY'S RETURN-TO-FLIGHT PHOTOGRAPHS RECORD MANY FIRSTS


     Earth observation photographs taken by Discovery's crew 
during America's return to piloted space flight in 1988 were 
among the clearest in more than 20 years, and they captured a 
variety of environmental conditions.

     Included in the astronauts' photography from the September 
1988 mission is a photograph showing at least a 1 million square-
mile smoke cloud over South America's Amazon River basin and, in 
Africa, evidence of flooding in areas that have experienced a 
lengthy drought.

     Due to an unexpected improvement in atmospheric clarity over 
the Northern Hemisphere, the Discovery crew could distinguish 
ground details about 700 miles away from their spacecraft, much 
farther than has been normal for Space Shuttle flights.  
Visibility over the Northern Hemisphere during STS-26 was the 
best since the 1960s Gemini Program flights.

     In total, the crew took 1,505 photographs of Earth during 
the 4-day mission.  Discovery was launched into an orbit that 
kept it above only the tropical and subtropical regions of 
Earth.  That orbit took the spacecraft over about half of Earth's 
surface, covering parts of 122 nations and regions that hold 
about 75 percent of the world's population.

     Photographs show a dense, white smoke cloud, the result of 
tropical forest, pasture and croplands being cleared and burned, 
completely obscuring the ground over much of South America's 
Amazon River basin.  If placed over the United States, the same 
cloud would cover an area of the country more than three times 
the size of Texas.  

     It is the largest and thickest accumulation of smoke ever 
photographed by astronauts, much larger than the previous largest 
smoke cloud photographed by astronauts over the same region in 
1984.

     STS-26 also photographed smoke clouds over Sumatra and 
Borneo, Indonesia, Madagascar, eastern Africa, northern Australia 
and Bolivia.  Some photographs show apparent irrigation features 
in the tropics -- in areas that normally receive 100 inches of 
annual rainfall.

     In Africa, the "green line" of vegetation that generally 
marks the southern boundary of the Sahara Desert had moved the 
farthest north it has been in astronaut photography since 1965.  
Also, standing water was photographed in the Sahara.

     For the first time in Shuttle history, Africa's Niger river 
was photographed in full flood and out of its banks.  Photographs 
of the Blue and White Nile rivers also showed evidence of recent 
flooding.

     Throughout eastern Africa, the landscape was tinted with 
green, a condition never before seen in this region during the 
Shuttle program.  Still, Africa's Lake Chad and Lake Nasser, two 
lakes that have long been studied by space photography, were at 
the lowest levels ever photographed by astronauts.  Since 1960, 
Lake Chad's surface area is estimated to have declined by more 
than 90 percent.

     The extreme atmospheric clarity over the Northern Hemisphere 
during the mission was due, at least in part, to the absence of 
major global duststorms.  Duststorms of million-square mile 
dimensions over northern Africa, even extending halfway across 
the Atlantic Ocean, were photographed during 1984 and 1985 
Shuttle flights.  But no such African duststorms were seen during 
STS-26, nor were major duststorms observed elsewhere.

     A lack of recent major volcanic eruptions, which cause dust 
in the upper atmosphere, also may have contributed to the extreme 
clarity.

     As a result, the STS-26 photographs captured details not 
usually seen in Shuttle photography: for the first time, an 
aircraft was photographed generating a contrail; individual 
buildings could be seen in the Canary Islands; a line of 
electrical transmission pylons was seen in southern Sudan; and 
oil platform flares were seen in the Gulf of Campeche.  STS-26 
also photographed the effects of Hurricane Gilbert on the Mexican 
Gulf Coast and five volcanoes with signs of eruptive activity.

     Earth photography from the Space Shuttle is managed by the 
Space Shuttle Earth Observations Office at the Johnson Space 
Center.  The office trains Shuttle crews in Earth photography, 
selects targets for photography for each mission and analyzes the 
resulting photographs.  In addition, research is conducted by 
specialists in environmental sciences, biology, climatology, 
geology and other fields using data obtained with Shuttle 
photography.
