38. Andre, M., and H. Du Cloux. 1993. Interaction of CO2 Enrichment and Water
Limitations on Photosynthesis and Water-Use Efficiency in Wheat. Plant
Physiology and Biochemistry 31:103-112.

186. Drake, B. G. 1992. A Field Study of the Effects of Elevated CO2 on
Ecosystem Processes in a Chesapeake Bay Wetland. Australian Journal of Botany
40:579-595.

488. Nie, D., H. He, M. B. Kirkham, and E. T. Kanemasu. 1992. Photosynthesis
of a C3 Grass and a C4 Grass under Elevated CO2. Photosynthetica 26:189-198.

618. Ryle, G. J. A., C. E. Powell, and V. Tewson. 1992. Effect of elevated co2
on photosynthesis, respiration and growth of perennial ryegrass. Journal of
Experimental Botany 43:811-818.

754. Ziska, L. H., and J. A. Bunce. 1993. Inhibition of Whole Plant
Respiration by Elevated CO2 as Modified by Growth Temperature. Physiologia
Plantarum 87:459-466.

765. Baker, J. T., L. H. Allen Jr., and K. J. Boote. 1992. Response of Rice to
Carbon Dioxide and Temperature. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology
60:153-166.

2066. Samarakoon, A. B., W. J. Muller, and R. M. Gifford. 1995. Transpiration
and leaf area under elevated CO2: Effects of soil water status and genotype in
wheat. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 22:33-44.

2119. Greer, D. H., W. A. Laing, and B. D. Campbell. 1995. Photosynthetic
responses of thirteen pasture species to elevated CO2 and temperature.
Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 22:713-722.

2125. Baxter, R., M. Gantley, T. W. Ashenden, and J. F. Farrar. 1994. Effects
of elevated carbon dioxide on three grass species from montane pasture.
Journal of Experimental Botany 45:1267-1287.

2132. Rao, M. V., B. A. Hale, and D. P. Ormrod. 1995. Amelioration of
ozone-induced oxidative damage in wheat plants grown under high carbon
dioxide. Plant Physiology 109:421-432.

2133. Tuba, Z., K. Szente, and J. Koch. 1994. Response of photosynthesis,
stomatal conductance, water use efficiency and production to long-term
elevated CO2 in winter wheat. Journal of Plant Physiology 144:661-668.

2158. Gloser, J., and M. Bartak. 1994. Net photosynthesis, growth rate and
biomass allocation in a rhizomatous grass Icalamagrostis epigejos grown at
elevated CO2 concentration. Photosynthetica 30(1):143-150.

2159. Ziska, L. H., and J. A. Bunce. 1994. Increasing growth temperature
reduces the stimulatory effect of elevated CO2 on photosynthesis or biomass in
two perennial species. Physiologia Plantarum 91:183-190.

2168. Knapp, A. K., E. P. Hamerlynck, and C. E. Owensby. 1993. Photosynthetic
and water relations responses to elevated CO2 in the C4 grass Andropogon
geradii. International Journal of Plant Science 154(4):459-466.

2184. Saebo, A., and L. M. Mortensen. 1995. Growth and regrowth of Phleum
pratense, Lolium perenne, Trifolium repens and Trifolium pratense at normal
and elevated O2 concentration. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment
55:29-35.

2192. Knapp, A. K., J. T. Fahnestock, and C. E. Owensby. 1994. Elevated
atmospheric O2 alters stomatal responses to variable sunlight in a C4 grass.
Plant, Cell and Environment 17:189-195.

2202. Wilsey, B. J., S. J. McNaughton, and J. S. Coleman. 1994. Will increases
in atmospheric O2 affect regrowth following grazing in C4 grasses from
tropical grasslands? Oecologia 99:141-144.

2208. Crush, J. R. 1994. Elevated atmospheric O2 concentration and rhizosphere
nitrogen fixation in four forage plants. New Zealand Journal of Agricultural
Research 37:455-463.

2211. Morgan, J. A., W. G. Knight, L. M. Dudley, and H. W. Hunt. 1994.
Enhanced root system C-sink activity, water relations and aspects fo nutrient
acquisistion in mycotrophic Bouteloua gracilis subjected to CO2 enrichment.
Plant and Soil 165:139-146.

2227. Bowler, J. M., and M. C. Press. 1993. Growth responses of two
contrasting upland grass species to elevated CO2 and nitrogen concentration.
New Phytologist 124:515-522.

2229. Mitchell, R. A. C., V. J. Mitchell, S. P. Driscoll, J. Franklin, and D.
W. Lawlor. 1993. Effects of increased CO2 concentration and temperature on
growth and yield of winter wheat at two levels of nitrogen application. Plant,
Cell and Environment 16:521-529.

2246. Baxter, R., T. W. Ashenden, T. H. Sparks, and J. F. Farrar. 1994.
Effects of elevated carbon dioxide on three montane grass species. Journal of
Experimental Botany 45 (272):305-315.

2300. Bassirirad, H., D. T. Tissue, J. F. Reynolds, and F. S. Chapin. 1996.
Response of Eriophorum vaginatum to CO2 enrichment at different soil
temperature: effects on growth, root respiration and PO-4 uptake kinetics. New
Phytologist 133:423-430.

2312. Wilsey, B. J. 1996. Urea additions and defoliation affect plant
responses to elevated CO2 in a C3 grassland from Yellowstone National Park.
Oecologia 108:321-327.

2315. Casella, E., J. F. Soussana, and P. Loiseau. 1996. Long-term effects of
CO2 enrichment and temperature increase on a temperate grass sward. 1.
Productivity and water use. Plant and Soil 182:83-99.

2316. Soussana, J. F., E. Casella, and P. Loiseau. 1996. Long-term effects of
CO2 enrichment and temperature increase on a temperate grass sward. 2. Plant
nitrogen budgets and root fraction. Plant and Soil 182:101-114.

2329. Jones, M. B., M. Jongen, and T. Doyle. 1996. Effects of elevated carbon
dioxide concentrations on agricultural grassland production. Agricultural and
Forest Meteorology 79:243-252.

2330. Stewart, J., and C. Potvin. 1996. Effects of elevated CO2 on an
artificial grassland community: competition, invasion and neighbourhood area.
Functional Ecology 10:157-166.

2337. Saebo, A., and L. M. Mortensen. 1996. The influence of elevated CO2
concentration on growth of seven grasses and one clover species in a cool
maritime climate. Acta Agriculturae Scandinavia Section B-Sorland Plant
Science 46:49-54.

2341. Schappi, B., and C. Korner. 1996. Growth responses of an alpine
grassland to elevated CO2. Oecologia 105:43-52.

2342. Jackson, R. B., and H. L. Reynolds. 1996. Nitrate and ammonium uptake
for single and mixed species communities grown at elevated CO2. Oecologia
105:74-80.

2345. Hakala, K., and T. Mela. 1996. The effects of prolonged exposure to
elevated temperatures and elevated CO2 leveles on the growth, yield and dry
matter partitioning of filed-sown meadow fescue. Agricultural and Food Science
in Finland 5(3):285-298.

2347. Jackson, R. B., Y. Luo, Z. G. Cardon, O. E. Sala, C. B. Field, and H. A.
Mooney. 1995. Photosynthesis, growth and density for the dominant species in a
CO2 enriched grassland. Journal of Biogeography 22:221-225.

2350. Teughels, H., I. Nijs, P. Van Hecke, and I. Impens. 1995. Competition in
a global change environment: The importance of different plant traits for
competitive success. Journal of Biogeography 22:297-305.

2351. Campbell, B. D., W. A. Laing, D. H. Gree, J. R. Crush, H. Clark, D. Y.
WIlliamson, and M. D. J. Given. 1995. Variation in grassland populations and
species and the implications for community responses to elevated CO2. Journal
of Biogeography 22:315-322.

2357. Chu, C. C., C. B. Field, and H. A. Mooney. 1996. Effects of CO2 and
nutrient enrichment on tissue quality of two California annuals. Oecologia
107:433-440.

2358. Ferris, R., I. Niy, T. Bejaeghe, and I. Impens. 1996. Contrasting CO2
and temperature effects on leaf growth of perennial rye grass in spring and
summer. Journal of Experimental Botany 47:1033-1043.

2362. Wheeler, T. R., G. R. Batts, R. H. Ellis, P. Hadley, and J. J. L.
Morison. 1996. Growth and yield of winter wheat (Triticum aestium) crops in
response to CO2 and temperature. Journal of Agricultural Science 127:37-48.

2363. Volin, J. C., and P. B. Reich. 1996. Interaction of elevated CO2 and O3
on growth, photosynthesis and respiration of three perennial species grown in
low and high nitrogen. Physiologia Plantarum 97:674-684.

2364. Miglietta, F., A. Giuntoli, and M. Bindi. 1996. The effect of free air
carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE) and soil nitrogen availability on the
photosynthetic capacity of wheat. Photosynthesis Research 47:281-290.

2366. Ziska, L. H., W. Weerakoon, O. S. Namuco, and R. Pamplona. 1996.
Influence of nitrogen on the elevated CO2 response in field-grown rice.
Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 23:45-52.

2367. Saebo, A., and L. M. Mortensen. 1996. Growth, morphology and yield of
wheat, barley and oats grown at elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration in a
cool maritime climate. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 57:9-15.

2369. Ziska, L. H., P. A. Manalo, and R. A. Ordonez. 1996. Intraspecific
variaiton in the response of rice (Oryza sativa L) to increased CO2 and
temeprature: growth and yield response of seventeen cultivars. Journal of
Experimental Botany 47:1353-1359.

2372. Nijs, I., H. Teughels, H. Blum, G. Hendrey, and I. Impens. 1996.
Simulation of climate change with infrared heaters reduces the productivity of
Lolium perenne L in summer. Environmental and Experimental Botany 36:271-280.

2379. Veisz, O., N. Harnos, L. Szunies, and T. Tischner. 1996. Overwintering
of winter cereals in Hungary in the case of global warming. Euphytica
92:249-253.

2383. Nijs, I., and I. Impens. 1996. Effects of elevated CO2 concentration and
climate-warming on photosynthesis during winter in Lolium perenne. Journal of
Experimental Botany 47:915-924.

2387. Leadley, P. W., and J. Stocklin. 1996. Effects of elevated CO2 on model
calcareous grasslands: Community, species, and genotype responses. Global
Change Biology 2:389-397.

2395. Tuba, Z., K. Szente, Z. Nagy, Z. Csintalan, and J. Koch. 1996. Responses
of CO2 assimilation, transpiration and water use efficiency to long-term
elevated CO2 in perennial C3 xeric loess steppe species. Journal of Plant
Physiology 148:356-361.

2398. Mortensen, L. M., and A. Saebo. 1996. The effects of elevated CO2
concentration on growth of Phleum pratense L. in different parts of the growth
season. Acta Agriculturaie Scandinavia Section B-Soil and Plant Science
46:128-134.

2401. Jackson, R. B., and A. L. Reynolds. 1996. Nitrate and annomium uptake
for single- and mixed species communities grown at elevated CO2. Oecologia
105:74-80.

2403. Fanymeier, A., U. Geuters, U. Hesstein, H. Sandhagel, A. Hoffmann, B.
Vermebren, and A. J. Jager. 1996. Effects of elevated CO2, nitrogen supply and
tropospheric ozone on spring wheat. 1. Growth and Yields. Environmental
Pollution 91:381-390.

2407. Kinball, B. A., P. J. Pinter, R. L. Garcia, R. L. La Mort, G. W. Wall,
D. J. Hunsaker, G. WEchsung, F. Wechsung, and T. Kartschall. 1995.
Productivity and water use of wheat under free-air CO2 enrichment. Global
Change Biology 1:429-442.

2420. Hunt, H. W., E. T. Elliot, J. K. Detling, J. A. Morgan, and D. X. Chen.
1996. Responses of a C3 and a C4 perennial grass to elevated CO2 and
temperature under different water regimes. Global Change Biology 2:35-47.

2427. Samarakoon, A. B., and R. M. Gifford. 1996. Elevated CO2 effects on
water use and growth of maize in wet and drying soils. Australian Journal of
Plant Physiology 23:53-62.

2430. Ruget, F., O. Bethenod, and L. Combe. 1996. Repercussions of increased
atmospheric CO2 on maize morphogenesis and growth for various temperature and
radiation levels. Maydica 41:181-191.

2440. Frank, A. B., and A. Bauer. 1996. Temperature, nitrogen and carbon
dioxide effects on spring wheat development and spikelet numbers. Crop Science
36:659-665.

2441. Read, J. J., and J. A. Morgan. 1996. Growth and partitioning in
Pascopyrum smithii (C3) and Bouteloua graciles (C4) as influenced by carbon
dioxide and temperature. Annals of Botany 77:487-496.

2443. Polley, H. W., H. B. Johnson, H. S. Mayeux, D. A. Brown, and J. W. C.
White. 1996. Leaf and plant water use efficiency of C4 species grown at
glacial to elevated CO2 concentrations. International Journal of Plant
Sciences 157:164-170.

2444. Bowler, J. M., and M. C. Press. 1996. Effects of elevated CO2 nitrogen
form and concentration on growth and photosynthesis of a fast- adn
slow-growing grass. New Phytologist 132:391-401.

2448. RowlandBamford, A. J., J. T. Baker, H. L. Allen, and G. Bowes. 1996.
Interactions of CO2 enrichment and temperature on carbohydrate accumulation
and partitioning in rice. Environmental and Experimental Botany 36:111-124.

2454. Bagash, D. Z., M. J. Paul, M. A. J. Parry, A. J. Keys, and D. W. Lawlor.
1995. Increased capacity for photosynthesis in wheat grown at elevated CO2.
The relationship between electron-transport and carbon metabolism. Planta
197:482-489.

2468. Rao, M. V., and L. J. Dekok. 1994. Interactive effects of high CO2 and
SO2 on growth and antioxidant levels in wheat. Phyton-Annales Rei Botanicae
34:279-290.

2474. Newbery, R. M., J. Wolfenden, T. A. Mansfield, and A. F. Harrison. 1995.
Nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium uptake and demand Agrostis capillaria. The
influence of elevated CO2 and nutrient supply. New Phytologist 130:565-574.

2480. Lenssen, G. M., W. E. Vandium, P. Jak, and J. Roxema. 1995. The response
of Aster tripolium and Puccinellia maritima to atmospheric carbon dioxide
enrichment and their interaction with flooding and salinity. Aquatic Botany
50:181-192.

2492. Schenk, U., R. Maderscheid, J. Hugen, and H. J. Weigel. 1995. Effects of
CO2 enrichment and intraspecific competition on biomass partitioning, nitrogen
content, and microbial biomass carbon in soil of perennial rye grass and white
clover. Journal of Experimental Botany 46:987-993.

2502. Jacob, J., C. Greitner, and B. G. Drake. 1995. Acclimation of
photosynthesis in relation to Rubisco and non-structural carbohydrate contents
and in-situ carboxylase activity in Scirpus olnei grown at elevated CO2 in the
field. Plant, Cell and Environment 18:875-884.

2503. Jongen, M., M. B. Jones, T. Hebeisen, H. Blum, and G. Hendrey. 1995. The
effects of elevated CO2 concentrations on the root growth of Lolium perenne
and Trifolium repens grown in a FACE system. Global Change Biology 1:361-371.

2504. Kleemola, J., J. Peltonen, and P. Peltonen-Sainio. 1994. Apical
development and growth of Barley under different CO2 and nitrogen regimes.
Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science 173:79-92. 

2510. Demothes, M. A. G., and D. Knoppik. 1994. Effects of long term enhanced
CO2 partial pressure on gas exchange parameters and saccharide pools of wheat
leaves. Photosynthetica 30:435-445.

2521. Balaguer, L., J. D. Barnes, A. Panicucci, and A. M. Borland. 1995.
Production and utilization of assimilates in wheat leaves exposed to elevated
O3 and/or CO2. New Phytologist 129:557-568.

2522. Barnes, J. D., J. H. Ollerenshaw, and C. P. Whitfield. 1995. Effects of
elevated CO2 and/or O3 on growth, development and physiology of wheat. Global
Change Biology 1:129-142. 

2525. Hattenschwiler, S., and C. Korner. 1996. System-level adjustments to
elevated CO2 in model spruce ecosystems. Global Change Biology 2:377-387.

2531. Owensby, C. E., P. I. Coyne, J. M. Ham, L. M. Avea, and A. K. Knapp.
1993. Biomass production in a tallgrass prairie ecosystem exposed to ambient
and elevated CO2. Ecological Applications 3:644-653. 

2541. Jackson, R. B., O. E. Sala, C. B. Field, and H. A. Mooney. 1994. CO2
alters water use, carbon gain, and yield for the dominant species in a natural
grassland. Oecologia 98:257-262.

2547. Baker, J. T., L. H. Allen, and K. J. Boote 1992. Temperature effects on
rice at elevated CO2 concentration. Journal of Experimental Botany 43:959-964. 

2579. Billes, G., H. Rouhier, and P. Bottner. 1993. Modifications of the
carbon and nitrogen allocations in the plant Triticum aestivum L. soil system
in response to increased atmospheric CO2 concentration. Plant and Soil
157:215-225. 

2580. Baker, J. T., S. L. Albrecht, D. Pan, L. H. Allen, N. B. Pickering, and
K. J. Boote. 1994. Carbon dioxide and temperature effects on rice (Oryza
sativa L., CV 1R-72). Soil and Crop Science Society of Florida, Proceedings
53:90-97. 

2595. Santruce, J., H. Santurckova, J. Kueton, M. Simkoua, and K. Rohacek.
1994. The effect of elevated CO2 concentration on photosynthetic CO2 fixation,
respiration and carbon economy of wheat plants. Rostlinna Vyroba 40:689-696. 

2597. Ingaurdsen, C., and B. Veierskov. 1994. Response of young barley plants
to CO2 enrichment. Journal of Experimental Botany 45:1373-1378.

2644. Reeves, D. W., H. H. Royers, S. A. Prior, C. W. Wood, and G. B. Runion.
1994. Elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide effects on sorghum and soybean
nutrient status. Journal of Plant Nutrition 17:1939-1954. 

2654. Jackson, R. B., Y. Lou, Z. G. Cardon, O. E. Sala, C. B. Field, and H. A.
Mooney. 1995. Photosynthesis, growth and density for the dominant species in a
CO2 enriched grassland. Journal of Biogeography 22:221-225.

2666. Samarakoon, A. B., and R. M. Gifford. 1995. Soil water content under
plants at high CO2 concentrations and interaction with the direct CO2 effects:
A species comparison. Journal of Biogeography 22:193-202.

2669. Schenk, U., A. J. Jager, and H. J. Weigel. 1996. Nitrogen supply
determine responses of yeild and biomass partitioning of perennial rye grass
to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. Journal of Plant
Nurtition 19:1423-1440. 

2692. Kimball, B. A., P. J. P. Pinter, R. L. Garcia, R. L. LaMorte, G. W.
Wall, D. J. Hunsaker, G. Wechsung, F. Wechsong, and T. Kartschall. 1995.
Productivity and water use of wheat under free-air CO2. Global Change Biology
1:429-442. 

2698. Potvin, C., and L. Vasseur. 1997. Long-term CO2 enrichment of a pasture
community: species richness, dominance, and succession. Ecology 78:666-677. 

2709. Hebeisen, T., A. Luscher, and J. Nosberger. 1997. Effects of elevated
atmospheric CO2 and nitrogen fertilisation on yield of Trifolium repens and
Lolium perenne. Acta Oecologica/Oecologia Plantarum 18:277-284. 

2710. Hebeisen, T., A. Luscher, S. Zanetti, B. U. Fischer, U. A. Hartwig, M.
Frehner, G. R. Hendrey, H. Blum, and J. Nosberger. 1997. Growth response of
Trifolium repens L and Lolium perenne L as monocultures and bi-species mixture
to free air CO2 enrichment and management. Global Change Biology 3:149-160. 

2711. Ghannoum, O., S. vonCaemmerer, E. W. R. Barlow, and J. P. Conroy. 1997.
The effect of CO2 enrichment and irradiance on the growth, morphology and gas
exchange of a C3 (Panicum laxum) and a C4 (Panicum antidotale) grass.
Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 24:227-237. 

2715. Cotrufo, M. F., and A. Gorissen. 1997. Elevated CO2 enhances
below-ground C allocation in three perennial grass species at different levels
of N availibility. New Phytologist 137:421-431. 

2718. Wilsey, B. J., J. S. Coleman, and S. J. McNaughton. 1997. Effects of
elevated CO2 and defoliation of grasses: A comparative ecosystem approach.
Ecological Applications 7:844-853.

2723. Stirling, C. M., P. A. Davey, T. G. Williams, and S. P. Long. 1997.
Acclimation of photosynthesis to elevated CO2 and temperature in five British
native species of contrasting functional type. Global Change Biology
3:237-246.

2735. Nijs, I., and I. Impens. 1997. An analysis of the balance between root
and shoot activity in Lolium perenne cv Melvina. Effects of CO2 concentration
and air temperature. New Phytologist 135:81-91.

2737. Mortensen, L. M. 1997. Effects of carbon dioxide concentrations on three
grass species grown in mixture in two soil types at different ozone
concentrations or temperatures. Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica, Section B,
Soil and Plant Sciences 47:14-19.

2756. Hamerlynck, E. P., C. A. McAllister, A. K. Knapp, J. M. Ham, and C. E.
Owensby. 1997. Photosynthetic gas exchange and water relation responses of
three tallgrass prairie species to elevated carbon dioxide and moderate
drought. International Journal of Plant Sciences 158:608-616.

2758. Stocker, R., P. W. Leadley, and C. Korner. 1997. Carbon and water fluxes
in a calcareous grassland under elevated CO2. Functional Ecology 11:222-230.

2785. Hungate, B. A., J. Canadell, and F. S. Chapin. 1996. Plant species
mediate changes in soil microbial N in response to elevated CO2. Ecology
77:2505-2515.

2793. Fitter, A. H., G. K. Self, J. Wolfenden, M. M. I. vanVuuren, T. K.
Brown, L. Williamson, J. D. Graves, and D. Robinson. 1996. Root production and
mortality under elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide. Plant and Soil
187:299-306.

2802. Casela, E., and J. F. Soussana. 1997. Long-term effects of CO2
enrichment and temperature increase on the carbon balance of a temperate grass
sward. Journal of Experimental Botany 48:1309-1321.

2821. Schapendonk, A. H. C. M., P. Dijkstra, J. Groenwold, C. S. Pot, and S.
C. vandeGeijn. 1997. Carbon balance and water use effciency of frequently cut
Lolium perenne L swards at elevated carbon dioxide. Global Change Biology
3:207-216.

2834. Baxter, R., T. W. Ashenden, and J. F. Farrar. 1997. Effect of elevated
CO2 and nutrient status on growth, dry matter partitioning and nutrient
content of Poa alpina var vivipara L. Journal of Experimental Botany
48:1477-1486.

2835. Bassirirad, H., J. F. Reynolds, R. A. Virginia, and M. H. Brunelle.
1997. Growth and root NO3- and PO43- uptake capacity of three desert species
in response to atmospheric CO2 enrichment. Australian Journal of Plant
Physiology 24:353-358.

2839. Lin, W. H., L. H. Ziska, O. S. Namuco, and K. Bai. 1997. The interaction
of high temperature and elevated CO2 on photosynthetic acclimation of single
leaves of rice in situ. Physiologia Plantarum 99:178-184.

2855. Wolf, J. 1996. Effects of nutrient supply (NPK) on spring wheat response
to elevated atmospheric CO2. Plant and Soil 185:113-123.

2856. Nakamura, T., M. Osaki, T. Koike, Y. T. Hanba, E. Wada, and T. Tadano.
1997. Effect of CO2 enrichment on carbon and nitrogen interaction in wheat and
soybean. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 43:789-798.

2892. McKee, I. F., J. F. Bullimore, and S. P. Long. 1997. Will elevated CO2
concentrations protect the yield of wheat from O3 damage? . Plant, Cell and
Environment 20:77-84.

2893. Manderscheid, R., and H. J. Weigel. 1997. Photosynthetic and growth
responses of old and modern spring wheat cultivars to atmospheric CO2
enrichment. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 64:65-73.

2895. Sicher, R. C., and J. A. Bunce. 1997. Relationship of photosynthetic
acclimation to changes of Rubisco activity in field-grown winter wheat and
barley during growth in elevated carbon dioxide. Photosynthesis Research
52:27-38.

2911. Mulholland, B. J., J. Craigon, C. R. Black, J. J. Colls, J. Atherton,
and G. Landon. 1997. Impact of elevated atmospheric CO2 and O3 on gas exchange
and chlorophyll content in spring wheat (Triticum aestivum L). Journal of
Experimental Botany 48:1853-1863.

2919. VanVuuren, M. M. I., D. Robinson, A. H. Fitter, S. D. Chasalow, L.
Williamson, and J. A. Raven. 1997. Effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 and
soil water availability on root biomass, root length, and N, P and K uptake by
wheat. New Phytologist 135:455-465.

2924. Vu, J. C. V., L. H. Allen, K. J. Boote, and G. Bowes. 1997. Effects of
elevated CO2 and temperature on photosynthesis and Rubisco in rice and
soybean. Plant, Cell and Environment 20:68-76.

2928. Ziska, L. H., O. Namuco, T. Moya, and J. Quilang. 1997. Growth and yield
response of field-grown tropical rice to increasing carbon dioxide and air
temperature. Agronomy Journal 89:45-53.

2935. Baker, J. T., L. H. Allen, K. J. Boote, and N. B. Pickering. 1997. Rice
responses to drought under carbon dioxide enrichment. 1. Growth and yield.
Global Change Biology 3:119-128.

3033. Patterson, D. T., and E. P. Flint. 1980. Potential effects of global
atmospheric CO2 enrichment on the growth and competitiveness of C3 and C4 weed
and crop plants. Weed Science 28:71-75.

3034. Potvin, C., and B. R. Strain. 1985. Photosynthetic response to growth
temperature and CO2 enrichment in two species of C4 grasses. Canadian Journal
of Botany 63:483-487.

3035. Potvin, C., and B. R. Strain. 1985. Effects of CO2 enrichment and
temperature on growth in two C4 weeds, Enchinochloa crus-galli and Eleusine
indica. Canadian Journal of Botany 63:1495-1499.

3036. Sionit, N., and D. T. Patterson. 1984. Responses of C4 grasses to
atmospheric CO2 enrichment. I. Effect of irradiance. Oecologia 65:30-34.

3038. Carter, D. R., and K. M. Peterson. 1983. Effects of a CO2 enriched
atmosphere on the growth and competitive interaction of a C3 and a C4 grass.
Oecologia 58:188-193.

3041. Morison, J. I. L., and R. M. Giford. 1984. Plant growth and water use
with limited water supply in high CO2 concentrations. II. Plant dry weight,
partitioning, and water use efficiency. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology
11:375-384.

3042. Wong, S. C. 1979. elevated atmospheric partial pressure of CO2 and plant
growth. I. Interactions of nitrogen nutrition and photosynthetic capacity in
C3 and C4 plants. Oecologia 44:68-74.
