65 FR 18290, April 7, 2000
                                                   A-122-823
                                                   Sunset Review
                                                   Public Document

MEMORANDUM TO: Robert S. LaRussa
               Assistant Secretary
                 for Import Administration

FROM:          Jeffrey A. May
               Director
               Office of Policy


SUBJECT:       Issues and Decision Memo for the Full Sunset Review
               of the Antidumping Duty Order on Cut-to-Length Carbon
               Steel Plate from Canada; Preliminary Results

Summary:

We have analyzed the comments of interested parties in the full
sunset review of the antidumping duty order on cut-to-length carbon
steel plate from Canada. We recommend that you approve the positions
we have developed in the Discussion of the Issues section of this
memorandum. Below is the complete list of the issues in this full
sunset review for which we received comments by parties:

1. Adequacy Determination

2. Likelihood of continuation or recurrence of dumping
   Weighted-average dumping margin
   Volume of imports
   Other factors

3. Magnitude of the margin likely to prevail
   Margins from the investigation
   Use of a more recent margin


History of the Order:

On August 19, 1993, the Department published an antidumping duty
order on cut-to-length carbon steel plate from Canada.(1) On
September 26, 1995, in an amendment to the final determination, the
Department assigned a weighted-average antidumping duty margin of
0.06 percent for IPSCO, Inc. ("IPSCO"), 68.70 percent for Stelco,
Inc. ("Stelco"), and 61.88 percent for "all others."(2) Because
IPSCO's margin was de minimis, it was excluded from the order.

The Department has completed five administrative reviews of the
order. In the first administrative review, covering the period
February 4, 1993, through July 31, 1994, the Department assigned a
margin of 1.82 percent for Algoma Steel, Inc. ("Algoma"), 0.02
percent for Manitoba Rolling Mills ("Manitoba"), and 0.92 percent for
Stelco.(3) In the second administrative review, covering the period
August 1, 1994, through July 31, 1995, the Department assigned a
margin of 0.37 percent for Algoma, and zero percent for Stelco.(4) In
the third administrative review, covering the period August 1, 1995,
through July 31, 1996, the Department assigned margins of 0.44
percent to Algoma, and zero percent for Gerdau MRM Steel ("MRM"),(5)
and an amended margin of 0.35 percent for Stelco.(6) In the fourth
administrative review, covering the period August 1, 1996, through
July 31, 1997, the Department determined margins of 0.23 percent for
Algoma, zero percent for MRM, zero percent for Stelco, and 68.70
percent for A.J. Forsyth and Co., Ltd. ("Forsyth").(7) In the fifth
administrative review, covering the period August 1, 1997, through
July 31, 1998, the Department determined margins of zero percent for
MRM and Stelco.(8)

There has been one scope ruling and two changed circumstances
reviews completed in this proceeding. On June 1, 1998, the Department
determined that certain carbon steel plate with boron added is
outside the scope of the order.(9) On February 28, 1996, the
Department revoked the order with respect to certain cut-to-length
carbon steel plate free of cobalt-60 and other radioactive nuclides;
and with certain dimensions and other characteristics.(10) On
February 12, 1999, the Department revoked the order with respect
certain cut-to-length carbon steel plate free of cobalt-60 and other
radioactive nuclides; and with certain dimensions and other
characteristics.(11) In addition, there has been one circumvention
inquiry initiated with respect to imports of boron-added grader blade
and draft key steel.(12) However, continuation of this inquiry was
subsequently enjoined by the Court of International Trade.(13)




Background:

On September 1, 1999, the Department initiated a sunset review of
the antidumping duty order on cut-to-length carbon steel plate from
Canada (64 FR 47767), pursuant to section 751(c) of the Tariff Act of
1930, as amended ("the Act"). The Department received a notice of
intent to participate on behalf of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation
and U.S. Steel Corporation, a unit of USX Corporation ("domestic
interested parties"), within the applicable deadline (September 15,
1999) specified in section 351.218(d)(1)(i) of the Sunset
Regulations. On October 1, 1999, Stelco Inc. ("Stelco") notified the
Department that it intended to participate in this review as a
respondent interested party. Domestic interested parties claimed
interested-party status under section 771(9)(C) of the Act, as U.S.
producers of a domestic like product; Stelco is an interested party
pursuant to section 771(9)(A) of the Act, as a foreign producer and
exporter of subject merchandise.

On September 24, 1999, we received a request for an extension to
file rebuttal comments from domestic interested parties.(14) Pursuant
to 19 CFR 351.302(b)(1999), the Department extended the deadline for
all participants eligible to file rebuttal comments until October 15,
1999.(15) On October 1, 1999, we received a complete substantive
response from domestic interested parties, within the 30-day deadline
specified in the Sunset Regulations under section 351.218(d)(3)(i),
and a complete substantive response from Stelco. On October 15, 1999,
we received rebuttal comments from domestic interested parties. On
October 20, 1999, pursuant to 19 CFR 351.218 (e)(1)(ii)(A), the
Department determined to conduct an expedited (120-day) sunset review
of this order.(16)

Domestic interested parties and Stelco claim that they have been
involved in this proceeding since its inception. Domestic interested
parties state that they have participated in the investigation, all
five administrative reviews, and all related appeals (see October 1,
1999, Substantive Response of domestic interested parties at 4).
Likewise, Stelco states that it was a respondent party in the
original investigation, and has participated in each subsequent
administrative review (see October 1, 1999, Substantive Response of
Stelco at 3).

On November 10, 1999, we received comments from Stelco on the
adequacy and appropriateness of an expedited sunset review concerning
the subject order. As discussed more fully below, we have
reconsidered our original adequacy determination and, as a result,
have determined to conduct a full review.

In accordance with section 751(c)(5)(C)(v) of the Act, the
Department may treat a review as extraordinarily complicated if it is
a review of a transition order (i.e., an order in effect on January
1, 1995). This review concerns a transition order within the meaning
of section 751(c)(6)(ii) of the Act. Accordingly, on December 22,
1999, the Department determined that the sunset review of cut-to-
length carbon steel flat plate from Canada is extraordinarily
complicated, and extended the time limit for completion of the final
results of this review until not later than March 29, 2000, in
accordance with section 751(c)(5)(B) of the Act.(17)


Discussion of the Issues

In accordance with section 751(c)(1) of the Act, the Department is
conducting this review to determine whether revocation of the
antidumping duty order would be likely to lead to continuation or
recurrence of dumping. Section 752(c) of the Act provides that, in
making this determination, the Department shall consider the weighted-
average dumping margins determined in the investigation and
subsequent reviews, and the volume of imports of the subject
merchandise for the period before and the period after the issuance
of the antidumping order. In addition, section 752(c)(3) of the Act
provides that the Department shall provide to the Commission the
magnitude of the margin of dumping likely to prevail if the order is
revoked.

Below we address the comments and rebuttals of the interested parties.

1. Adequacy Determination

Interested Party Comments:

Stelco argues in its November 10, 1999, comments on adequacy that,
in finding Stelco's response to be inadequate because Stelco accounts
for less than fifty percent of Canadian exports into the United
States, the Department has ignored the unique circumstances of this
antidumping duty order. Stelco contends that, because it will be the
only major Canadian producer remaining subject to the antidumping
duty order, the Department's decision to conduct an expedited review
(1) is contrary to its stated approach, (2) is inconsistent with
prior Department practice, (3) fails to adhere to the purpose of the
statute, and (4) violates U.S. obligations under the World Trade
Organization ("WTO") antidumping agreement and GATT 1994 (see
November 10, 1999, Comments on Adequacy of Stelco at 2). First,
Stelco argues that unique circumstances exist in this review that
warrant the Department's flexibility when applying its fifty percent
guideline; namely, the fact that Stelco is the only remaining company
(of three Canadian companies, Stelco, Algoma, IPSCO, that account for
most of the carbon steel plate in Canada) that has not been excluded
from the order. Id. at 4. Stelco notes that (1) IPSCO was excluded
from the order when its margin from the original investigation was
found to be de minimis; (2) the Department determined to revoke the
order with respect to Algoma as a result of three consecutive zero or
de minimis margins and a finding that Algoma is not likely to dump in
the future; and (3) the Department issued a preliminary determination
in an administrative review stating that the Department intends to
revoke the order with respect to MRM. Id. at 5.

In addition, Stelco argues that the fact that the Department's
ruling on adequacy is based on MRM's failure to submit a substantive
response in this review completely ignores the commercial reality
that MRM had no incentive to participate in this review. According to
Stelco, MRM was technically subject to the antidumping duty order as
of October 1999, and the antidumping duty order was expected to be
revoked in December 1999. Id. at 6. Thus, the Department's decision
to conduct an expedited review penalizes Stelco for the fact that no
other Canadian producer has an incentive to participate in the
Department's sunset review. Id. at 7.

Stelco cites a previous sunset case, Tapered Roller Bearings from
the PRC, in which the Department reversed its initial determination
to conduct an expedited review. Id. Stelco states that the Department
noted, in this prior review, that its original calculations
underestimated the respondents' imports of subject merchandise
because the value of total imports included imports from a company
for which the order was revoked. Further, although imports from the
respondents accounted for less than fifty percent over the five years
prior to initiation of the sunset review, respondents accounted for
more that fifty percent in the most recent year. Id. Thus, Stelco
asserts, in the present case, the Department must similarly recognize
the unique circumstances that require it to apply the fifty percent
threshold as a guideline, not a rule. Id.

In addition, Stelco asserts that the Department's decision to base
its adequacy determination solely on what happened in the past is
inconsistent with the Department's obligations under the sunset
statute to adopt a forward-looking analysis. Stelco argues that the
statute does not require the Department to apply the fifty percent
threshold in its adequacy analysis, nor does it mandate that the
Department examine the five calendar years preceding initiation. Id.
at 10. Instead, Stelco continues, the fifty percent threshold and the
five-year window are analytical tools that the Department "normally"
uses for administrative convenience and, therefore, the Department
must consider its own prior determinations involving other producers
and the effects of such decisions on the case. Id.

Stelco argues that, although the Department's regulation appears to
rely on the SAA for imposing its fifty percent threshold, the SAA is
not law and does not supplant the statute. Instead, the SAA is merely
a form of legislative history, which is relevant only when a
"question arises" concerning the URAA, and even then should be used
only for guidance, not binding directives. Id. at 11. Second, the SAA
itself does not require the Department to adopt any presumptions for
its adequacy determination; it merely requires the Department to
consider the proportion of parties that respond. Id. Finally, the SAA
requires the Department to examine the parties potential share of the
market in a forward-looking analysis. Id.

Further, Stelco argues that the Department's determination to
conduct an expedited review in this case, violates WTO Trade Rules.
Specifically, Stelco asserts that, under Article 11.3 of the WTO
Antidumping Agreement, the Department is required to undertake a
forward and reasoned analysis to determine the likely recurrence or
continuance of dumping, and not apply rules rigidly to reach pre-
determined conclusions. Id. at 12. Stelco contends that, given the
mandate of the WTO Antidumping Agreement and the sunset review
statute to conduct a prospective analysis, and the mandate in the
Department's own regulation to make adequacy determinations on a case-
by-case basis, the Department must recognize the fact that Stelco
will be the sole producer subject to the order within a matter of
mere weeks. Id. at 13. As such, and because Stelco filed a complete
substantive response, the Department should conduct a full sunset
review in this case. Id.

Finally, Stelco asserts that section 351.218 of the Department's
regulations also violates the national treatment principle of GATT
1994 because it applies different standards to respondent interested
parties than it does to domestic interested parties; the regulations
make clear that, in an expedited sunset review, the Department's
determination will be against the side that did not express
sufficient interest. Id. at 15. Specifically, the Department will not
find sufficient interest unless the Department receives complete
substantive responses from respondent interested parties accounting
for more than fifty percent of total exports over the five calendar
years preceding initiation of the sunset review. In contrast, there
is no volume threshold requirement for domestic interested parties.
Thus, according to Stelco, the Department is according less favorable
treatment to importers and exporters and thereby violating the
national treatment obligation of GATT 1994. Id. at 16.


Department's Position:

The Department agrees with Stelco that a full review is appropriate
in this case. Consistent with our prior practice (i.e., our
reexamination of our adequacy determination in the review of Tapered
Roller Bearings from the PRC), we have attempted to reexamine the
percentage of imports accounted for by Stelco. However, in light of
the fact that IPSCO was excluded from the order and further, that the
order was recently revoked with respect to Algoma, reliable
statistics are not available with respect to the total volume or
value of imports from producers/exporters subject to the order.
Therefore, we are unable to determine with any degree of confidence,
the percentage of imports accounted for by respondent interested
parties. We agree with Stelco that section 351.218(e)(1)(ii) of the
Sunset Regulations merely provides a threshold that the Department
normally will apply for purposes of determining adequacy; it does not
provide an absolute. Therefore, given that the order does not apply
to imports from IPSCO and Algoma, and we have no reliable statistics
on the volume and/or value of imports of subject merchandise, we
determine that Stelco's participation in the instant review is
sufficient to warrant a full review in this case.


2. Likelihood of Continuation or Recurrence of Dumping

Interested Party Comments

In their substantive response of October 1, 1999, domestic
interested parties assert that revocation of the subject order is
likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping. They state
that the record of this proceeding demonstrates that dumping
continued at above de minimis levels after the order was issued,
and import volumes have declined significantly in recent review
periods (see October 1, 1999, Substantive Response of domestic
interested parties at 4).

Domestic interested parties note that in the 1993/94 administrative
review, Stelco had a margin of 0.92 percent and Algoma had a margin
of 1.82 percent, and in the 1996/97 review, Forsyth had a margin of
68.70 percent. Therefore, they assert, the record shows that dumping
has continued at above de minimis levels after the imposition of the
order, and satisfies the Department's guidelines that the order
should not be revoked (see October 1, 1999, Substantive Response of
domestic interested parties at 10).

In addition, domestic interested parties assert that imports of
Canadian cut-to-length carbon steel plate remain below sixty percent
of their pre-order levels. Id. at 11. Further, they state that
Canadian producers' share of the U.S. market for cut-to-length carbon
steel plate has dropped from 2.55 percent immediately prior to the
order, to only 1.36 percent for the past year. Id. at 13. Domestic
interested parties state that this case, therefore, satisfies the
Department's guidelines and the order should not be revoked. Id.

In its substantive response of October 1, 1999, Stelco asserts that
revocation of the subject order would not likely lead to a recurrence
of material injury or of dumping (see October 1, 1999, Substantive
Response of Stelco at 13). Stelco contends that, for the past four
years, all Canadian producers, itself included, have been able to
sell cut-to-length plate to the United States at prices above normal
value. Id. at 14. Stelco states that, except for the negligible
margins for two companies (0.92 percent and 1.82 percent) found in
the 1993/94 review, no Canadian producer of subject merchandise has
been found to have engaged in dumping since the imposition of the
original order, not withstanding that the Department has conducted an
administrative review in every single year. Id. at 13-14.

Stelco also asserts that the import volumes from Canada following
the imposition of the order have been at a level comparable to the
volume of imports before the order was imposed. Id. at 14. Stelco
states that, on an aggregate level, total Canadian shipments to the
United States have been increasing every year since 1994, and 1998
shipments are virtually equal to shipments in 1991, the year
preceding the initiation of the dumping investigation. Id. Stelco
adds that a similar conclusion can be made with respect to its
shipments. Id. Thus, Stelco contends that the demonstrated ability of
all Canadian producers to ship to the United States commercially
significant quantities of subject merchandise without dumping
establishes, under the Departments own guidelines, a presumption that
revocation of the order will not likely lead to recurrence of
dumping, and the Department should revoke the order on this basis.
Id. at 15.

Stelco argues that, even if the Department determines that there
should not be a presumption in favor of revocation, the Department
should not conclude that a presumption exists that dumping is likely
to recur in the future. First, Stelco states, there was virtually no
dumping after the order was issued, and total import volumes
increased in every year since 1994, with 1998 volumes essentially
equal to import volumes before the investigation was initiated. Id.
at 16. Second, Stelco contends that its individual shipments have
been consistent as well, with Stelco's 1996 shipment volume about
equal to its volume in 1991. Id. Further, Stelco asserts that its
decrease in shipments in 1996 is due to a major overhaul and
modernization of Stelco's plate mill; and dramatically reduced
capacity. Therefore, Stelco contends, the inability to use volume and
margin data to establish a presumption for either outcome constitutes
sufficient good cause to examine other economic factors. Id. at 16-17.

Stelco asserts that the most important factor in the Department's
analysis is the fact that virtually all Canadian producers are no
longer subject to the antidumping duty order on cut-to-length plate.
Id. at 17. Stelco notes again that, of the four bona fide producers
of cut-to-length plate in Canada, (1) IPSCO was excluded from the
order during the original investigation (2) in January 1999, the
Department issued a final determination that revoked the order with
respect to Algoma, as a result of three consecutive zero or de
minimis margins and the Department's finding that Algoma is not
likely to dump in the future; and (3) in August 1999, the Department
issued a preliminary determination stating the Department's intent to
revoke the order with respect to MRM.(18) Thus, only one producer,
Stelco, is still subject to the antidumping duty order. Stelco
contends that, given that it has not shipped at dumped prices for
more than four years, Stelco also would have been excluded from the
order but for the fact that during one of the review periods Stelco's
production capacity constraints and strong home market demand did not
allow the company to ship cut-to-length plate to the United States at
a volume that satisfied the Department's definition of "commercial
quantities" (see October 1, 1999, Substantive Response of Stelco at
18). Thus, Stelco asserts, these facts provide conclusive evidence
that Canadian producers are able to participate in the U.S. market
without engaging in dumping. Id.

Stelco also notes that demand in Canada, Stelco's home (and most
important) market, has increased steadily over the past five years,
making it unlikely that Stelco will be able (or need) to ship large
volumes to the United States. Id. at 19. In fact, Stelco continues,
Canadian demand for subject carbon steel plate has increased 56.7
percent over the past five years, causing Stelco to concentrate its
cut-to-length production efforts on servicing its long-established
home market customers and supplying its long-standing customers. Id.
at 20-21. Stelco contends that it did not increase sales to the
United States in 1998 when both U.S. pricing and a weakening Canadian
dollar presented an opportunity, demonstrating that Stelco was just
too busy servicing its home market customers. Id. at 21.

Stelco also notes that it reduced its output of subject merchandise
in 1997 and 1998 because it was in the midst of a multi-million
dollar, comprehensive modernization and upgrade of its plate mill
(expected to be fully operational by 2001), whereby Stelco will be
able to produce new higher value-added products and participate in
growing segments of the Canadian plate markets. Id. at 22. Stelco
provides a description of the new products that its plate mill will
be able to manufacture. Stelco estimates that, once the modernization
and upgrade are completed, it will be able to recognize a reduction
in per-ton costs for carbon steel plate, shift its focus towards
alternative and higher-priced product markets in Canada, and enhance
its price flexibility in the Canadian market. Id. at 24.

In addition, Stelco notes that on-going U.S. cut-to-length plate
antidumping investigations have routed imports from six other
countries, lifting prices and eliminating any need for Selco to ship
at dumped prices, reinforcing the trend of falling imports from
September 1998 through May 1999. Id. at 24. Stelco contends that
since the antidumping petition was filed on February 16, steel
industry analysts and executives have predicted, and company reports
have confirmed, the resulting declines in subject import volumes and
the upward pressure on cut-to-length plate prices in light of a
growth trend of business activity. Id. at 25. Thus, Stelco asserts,
the end result of improving prices (and demand) for cut-to-length
plate in the United States is the elimination of any reason Canadian
steel companies may have ever had for dumping subject merchandise in
the U.S. market. Id. at 28.

Finally, Stelco argues that, for several years, the Canadian dollar
has been significantly weaker against the U.S. dollar, providing
Stelco with an additional margin of safety to avoid dumped sales. Id.
at 29. Stelco asserts that the Canadian dollar is likely to continue
its stability and in the distant future, it is unlikely that the
Canadian dollar will do anything but continue its several-year
pattern of general stability. Id. at 29-30.

In their rebuttal of October 15, 1999, domestic interested parties
reassert that, since the 1993 order, Canadian producers have
continued to sell subject merchandise in the United States at LTFV
and import volumes of cut-to-length carbon steel plate have fallen
significantly, demonstrating that dumping is likely to continue (see
October 15, 1999, Rebuttal of domestic interested parties at 2).
Domestic interested parties argue that Stelco's claims that margins
have declined and imports have remained steady or increased is
unsupported by the record, and further, that declining margins alone
are not enough to warrant revocation of the order. Rather, the
continued existence of above de minimis margins following the order
is enough to prevent its revocation, regardless of import level
changes. Id. at 5. Domestic interested parties note that, in at least
two of the periods for which Stelco had a zero margin, the Department
found that the company did not ship subject merchandise in commercial
quantities. For instance, Stelco had a zero margin in the 1994/95
review and in the 1997/98 review, however, the Department found that
the company did not ship subject merchandise in commercial quantities
during these periods. Id. at 6. Moreover, the Department denied
revocation in the 1995/96 review and in the 1996/97 review because
Stelco had failed to participate meaningfully in the U.S. market in
the two periods in question, and because the zero or de minimis
margins did not provide any meaningful information on Stelco's normal
commercial experience. Id. Further, according to domestic interested
parties, the record belies Stelco's claim that import volumes have
remained steady or increased. Rather, there is evidence of a dramatic
drop in imports of subject merchandise from Canada and a decline in
Stelco's market share after the imposition of the order. Id. at 9.

Domestic interested parties argue that Stelco fails to show good
cause as to why the Department should consider other factors, and
that, contrary to Stelco's assertion, the record more than
demonstrates a significant decline in imports from the pre-order
levels. Id. Thus, the domestic interested parties assert, Stelco
fails to meet its burden to show the necessity for consideration of
other factors. However, even if the Department were to consider other
factors, none of the factors cited by Stelco-alone or in combination-
would change the conclusion that dumping is likely to continue or
recur. Id. at 10. Domestic interested parties argue that Stelco's
assertion that it is the only remaining Canadian producer subject to
the order does not change the fact that it was unable to ship in
commercial quantities without dumping for at least three out of the
five administrative reviews. Id. Moreover, Forsyth had a margin of
68.70 percent in the 1995/96 review. Given that margins have
continued and imports have declined, the continuation of the order is
clearly necessary even if it will relate primarily to Stelco's
shipments. Id.

In addition, domestic interested parties note that, with respect to
Stelco's overhaul of its plate facility, additional production
capacity will make Stelco even more likely to engage in dumping once
the overhaul is complete. Id. at 11. Further, with respect to
Stelco's reliance on increased demand in Canada, the evidence
suggests that, far from increasing, demand in Canada has been
weakening and will continue to do so. Id. at 11-12. Thus, a decrease
in demand combined with Stelco's recent increase in capacity creates
an even greater likelihood that dumping will continue in the future.
Id. at 12.

In its rebuttal of October 15, 1999, Stelco reasserts that the
continued absence of dumping and the continued level of imports from
Canada demonstrate that neither Stelco nor any other Canadian
producer is likely to sell cut-to-length plate in the United States
at less-than-fair value prices. Stelco contends that, contrary to
domestic interested parties' claim, dumping has been eliminated and
the pre-order volume of imports is equivalent to the post-order
volume of imports. Stelco notes that, whereas the Department found
margins ranging from 61.88 to 68.7 percent in the original
investigation, margins instantly dropped to a range of 0.02 to 1.82
percent in the first administrative review (see October 15, 1999,
Rebuttal of Stelco at 3). Stelco also cites the Department's
preliminary determination in Brass Sheet and Strip from the
Netherlands, whereby the Department found that, although respondent
interested parties had shipped at above de minimis levels after the
issuance of the order, the absence of dumping in the two most recent
review periods was probative of the fact that the respondent could
export without dumping. Id. at 3.

Stelco notes that the Department's rate for A.J. Forsyth, a re-
seller, was very high; however, it was not based on actual company
data, but instead on "adverse facts available." Id. Further, the
Department had not conducted a review of Forsyth previously, and has
not reviewed Forsyth since. According to Stelco, Forsyth is not a
producer of subject merchandise, but a small privately-held service
center which exports very minimal volumes to the United States. Id.
Therefore, Stelco contends, it would be inappropriate for the
Department to consider Forsyth in its analysis; instead, the
Department should focus on the four bona fide plate producers in
Canada-Stelco, IPSCO, MRM, and Algoma-and find that none of the
Canadian producers of subject merchandise is now, or has in the past
several years, engaged in dumping. Id. at 4. Stelco notes that
whereas the Department found in Brass Sheet and Strip from the
Netherlands just two review periods without dumping, in the current
case, not one Canadian producer of cut-to-length plate has been found
to have dumped in the past five years. Id. Moreover, in every review
in the past five years in which the Department made a determination
based on actual company data, the Department has found that there was
no dumping. Id.

Stelco also argues that, contrary to the claims of domestic
interested parties, imports of Canadian cut-to-length plate have not
dropped, but have remained steady or increased. Id. at 5. Moreover,
on an aggregate level, Canadian imports of cut-to-length plate have
been increasing every year since 1994, and Stelco's shipments, when
viewed alone, remained steady until 1996, two years after the
issuance of the order. Id. at 6. Stelco notes that the decline in its
1997 and 1998 imports was due solely to a drastic decrease in
Stelco's production capacity which resulted from disruptions caused
by the comprehensive overhaul of its plate mill. Id.

Finally, Stelco contends that, even if the Department determines
that the above presumption does not apply, the Department should
still examine the other factors which show that future dumping is not
likely to occur. Id. Stelco notes the various factors regarding the
likelihood of future dumping, including: (1) the fact that there is
only one remaining Canadian producer subject to the antidumping
order; (2) increasing demand in the Canadian market for plate
products; (3) modernization of Stelco's plate mill will allow Stelco
to focus on Canadian demand for higher value-added products; (4)
reduced competition for plate in the U.S. market due to ongoing plate
dumping investigations; and (5) an attractive U.S.-Canadian currency
exchange rate, each of which make dumping by Canadian producers more
unlikely. Id. at 7.


Department's Position

Drawing on the guidance provided in the legislative history
accompanying the Uruguay Round Agreements Act ("URAA"), specifically
the Statement of Administrative Action ("the SAA"), H.R. Doc. No. 103-
316, vol. 1 (1994), the House Report, H.R. Rep. No. 103-826, pt.1
(1994), and the Senate Report, S. Rep. No. 103-412 (1994), the
Department issued its Sunset Policy Bulletin providing guidance on
methodological and analytical issues, including the bases for
likelihood determinations. In its Sunset Policy Bulletin, the
Department indicated that determinations of likelihood will be made
on an order-wide basis (see section II.A.2). In addition, the
Department indicated that, normally, it will determine that
revocation of an antidumping order is likely to lead to continuation
or recurrence of dumping where (a) dumping continued at any level
above de minimis after the issuance of the order, (b) imports of the
subject merchandise ceased after the issuance of the order, or (c)
dumping was eliminated after the issuance of the order and import
volumes for the subject merchandise declined significantly (see
section II.A.3).

As discussed in section II.A.3 of the Sunset Policy Bulletin, the
SAA at 890, and the House Report at 63-64, if companies continue
dumping with the discipline of an order in place, the Department may
reasonably infer that dumping would continue if the discipline were
removed. Domestic interested parties are correct that there have been
above de minimis margins throughout the history of the order,
including 0.92 for Stelco in the 1993/94 review and 68.70 percent for
Forsyth in the 1996/97 review. We do not agree with the domestic
interested parties that Algoma's margin from the first administrative
review is probative of likelihood of continuation of dumping given
that the Department has already revoked the order with respect to
Algoma. Respondent interested parties are correct that the Department
assigned a zero or de minimis margin to Stelco in each of the four
most recent reviews; however, as noted above, margins continue to
exist at above de minimis levels for at least one manufacturer,
producer, or exporter.

Consistent with section 752(c) of the Act, the Department also
considered the volume of imports before and after issuance of the
order. According to the import statistics provided by domestic
interested parties, imports of subject merchandise remain below sixty
percent of their pre-order levels. Stelco asserts that, on the
contrary, 1998 Canadian shipments to the United States are virtually
equal to shipments in 1991, the year before the initiation of the
investigation (see October 1, 1999, Substantive Response of Stelco at
14). While these sets of statistics differ with respect to changes
from their pre-order levels, they share a pattern, as seen in our
IM145 reports statistics, of average increases in imports from 1995
through 1999. We also considered the company-specific exports of
subject merchandise provided by Stelco. The statistics do not show a
pattern of consistent increases, or a return to pre-order volumes.

We are not persuaded by respondent interested parties' principal
argument that, because Stelco is still subject to the order and has
not dumped for more than four years, we can conclude that Canadian
producers will participate in the U.S. market without engaging in
dumping in the future. We find that the existence of dumping margins
after the issuance of the order is highly probative of the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence of dumping. Therefore have not
considered other factors in this case. Given that dumping continued
after the issuance of the order, and imports continued in 1998 at
below pre-order levels, we determine that dumping is likely to
continue if the order were revoked.


3. Magnitude of the Margin Likely to Prevail:

Interested Party Comments:

In their substantive response, domestic interested parties assert
that the Department should report to the Commission the final margins
of 68.70 percent for Stelco, and 61.88 percent for "all others" from
the investigation because these are the only calculated rates that
reflect the behavior of the exporters without the discipline of the
order in place (see October 1, 1999, Substantive Response of domestic
interested parties at 14).

In its substantive response, Stelco contends that the margin from
the original investigation is, by far, the least probative of the
magnitude of the dumping margin, if any, that would prevail on Stelco
sales if the order were revoked (see October 1, 1999, Substantive
Response of Stelco at 5-6). Stelco asserts that the original margin
is based on sales data that is more than six years old, and
therefore, is entirely unrepresentative of any margins that might
exist in the year 2000 and beyond. Id. at 6. Stelco states that the
sheer age of the original investigation margin coupled with
dramatically altered market conditions, make the original margin
inherently unreliable. Id.

Stelco contends that its de minimis margins of zero percent to 0.35
percent from period 1994 through 1997 more appropriately reflect the
margin like to prevail were the order revoked. Id. During this
period, Stelco asserts that it shipped quantities virtually identical
to its volume of shipments in 1991, the year preceding the
investigation. Further, Stelco notes its established history of
ensuring that its U.S. sales are not made at dumped prices. For
instance, Stelco has developed a computer-driven history of prices
and costs that is used to ensure that Stelco's U.S. sales are not
made at dumped prices. Id. Thus, Stelco asserts, the Department
should report to the Commission a de minimis margin for Stelco.

In their rebuttal, domestic interested parties assert that Stelco's
analysis is flawed with respect to the magnitude of the margin on two
points. Domestic interested parties reassert that the margin from the
investigation is the only rate that reflects Stelco's behavior
without the discipline of an order, and contend that a more recently
calculated margin instead reflects Stelco's behavior as the company
has modified it in response to the antidumping duty order. Id. at 13.
According to domestic interested parties, the data shows that
Stelco's import volumes declined dramatically after the order.
Further, the fact that the margin is more than six years old is not
relevant, as argued by Stelco, to the margin likely to prevail. The
Department has reported margins likely to prevail in past sunset
reviews that were from investigations much older than the present
one, and the margin of 68.70 percent from the investigation remains
the only calculated rate that reflects the behavior of exporters
without the discipline of the an order. Id. at 13.

In its rebuttal, Stelco urges the Department to reject domestic
interested parties' assertion, and instead, determine that the
margins found during the original investigation are inflated and
inappropriate in this situation (see October 15, 1999, Rebuttal of
Stelco at 8). First, Stelco asserts that those margins are highly
unreliable because they were based on best-information available
("BIA"), which necessarily distorts the margin. Id. Stelco contends
that BIA is not based on actual sales data and, therefore, is not
probative of past and future behavior. Additionally, the Department
has not relied on BIA for Stelco in any one of the administrative
reviews since the original investigation. Id. Second, Stelco argues
that there is no question that the dumping margins in this case have
"declined" if not completely disappeared. Id. at 9. Stelco notes that
no Canadian producer has been found to have dumped in the past five
years, import volumes today are the same as they were in the year
before the investigation, and volumes have increased steadily over
the past several years. Id.

Finally, Stelco reasserts that the Department should select a de
minimis margin to provide to the Commission for Stelco based on the
fact that its margins have remained de minimis since the 1994/95
review, and its quantities of shipments in 1995/96 were virtually
identical to its shipments in 1991, the year preceding the
investigation. Id. Thus, should the Department determine that Stelco
is likely to resume dumping if the order were revoked, the magnitude
of dumping is likely to be de minimis. Id.


Department's Position

In the Sunset Policy Bulletin, the Department stated that it will
normally provide to the Commission the margin that was determined in
the final determination in the original investigation. Further, for
companies not specifically investigated or for companies that did not
begin shipping until after the order was issued, the Department
normally will provide a margin based on the "all others" rate from
the investigation (see section II.B.1 of the Sunset Policy Bulletin).
Exceptions to this policy include the use of a more recently
calculated margin, where appropriate, and consideration of duty
absorption determinations (see sections II.B.2 and 3 of the Sunset
Policy Bulletin).

Although Stelco's margins in subsequent administrative reviews have
been significantly lower than the 68.70 percent from the original
investigation, we have also considered the company's relative market
share. The SAA at 889-90, and the House Report at 63, state that
declining or no dumping margins accompanied by steady or increasing
imports may indicate that foreign companies do not need to dump to
maintain market share in the United States. Because Stelco's relative
market share has been insignificant after the issuance of the order,
we do not find the lower margins to be probative of Stelco's future
behavior with respect to the likelihood of dumping. In addition,
because Stelco's shipments do not reflect a steady or increasing
pattern of imports, as seen in the total volume of imports from
Canada, we do not believe that a more recent margin is appropriate.
Therefore, the Department will provide to the Commission the rate
from the original investigation for Stelco.

As noted above, for companies not specifically investigated or for
companies that did not begin shipping until after the order was
issued, the Department normally will provide a margin based on an
"all others" rate from the investigation. The Department notes that,
contrary to Stelco's prediction in its substantive response, the
order was not revoked with respect to MRM. The Department found, in
the February 24, 2000, final results of its 1997/98 review that, in
light of the Department's pending anti-circumvention investigation of
MRM, and given the fact that its alleged circumvention of the order
remains unresolved, MRM had not satisfied the requirements for
revocation.(19) Because MRM did not participate in the sunset review,
and was not a respondent interested party in the original
investigation, we have no information with which to evaluate whether
MRM chose to increase dumping in order to maintain or increase market
share. As a result, we will not report a separate rate for MRM.

As such, the Department will report to the Commission the original
margin from the final determination as the magnitude of the margin
likely to prevail for "all others" if the order were revoked, as
contained in the Final Results of Review section of this decision
memo.


Final Results of Review

We determine that revocation of the antidumping duty order on cut-to-
length carbon steel plate from Canada would be likely to lead to
continuation or recurrence of dumping at the following percentage
weighted-average margins:


___________________________________________________________

Manufacturer/exporters                    Margin (percent)
___________________________________________________________

Stelco, Inc.                                  68.70
All Others                                    61.88
___________________________________________________________


Recommendation:
Based on our analysis of the comments received, we recommend
adopting all of the above positions. If these recommendations are
accepted, we will publish the Preliminary Results of Review in the
Federal Register.



AGREE____

DISAGREE____



___________________________

Joseph A. Spetrini
Acting Assistant Secretary
  for Import Administration
_____________________
(Date)



___________________________________________________________
footnotes:


1. See Antidumping Duty Orders: Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon
Steel Flat Products and Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from
Canada, 58 FR 44162 (August 19, 1993).

2. See Amended Final Determinations of Sales at Less Than Fair Value
and Antidumping Orders: Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat
Products and Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada, 60
FR 49582 (September 26, 1995).

3. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel flat Products and
Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada; Final Results
of Antidumping Administrative Reviews, 61 FR 13815 (March 28, 1996).

4. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products from
Canada and Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada;
Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews, 62 FR 18448
(August 15, 1997).

5. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products from
Canada and Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada;
Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews, 63 FR 12725
(March 16, 1998).

6. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products from
Canada and Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada:
Amended Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, 63
FR 27258 (May 18, 1998).

7. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products and
Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada: Final Results
of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews and Determination to
Revoke in Part, 64 FR 2173 (January 13, 1999).

8. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products and
Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada: Final Results
of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews and Determination Not to
Revoke in Part, 65 FR 9243 (February 24, 2000).

9. See Notice of Scope Rulings, 63 FR 29179 (May 28, 1998).

10. See Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada: Final
Results of Changed Circumstances Antidumping Duty Administrative
Review, and Revocation in Part of Antidumping Duty Order, 61 FR 7471
(February 28, 1996).

11. See Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada: Final
Results of Changed Circumstances Antidumping Duty Administrative
Review, and Revocation in Part of Antidumping Duty Order, 64 FR 7167
(February 12, 1999).

12. See Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada; Initiation of
Anticircumvention Inquiry on Antidumping Duty Order, 63 FR 29179 (May
28, 1998).

13. Co-Steel Lasco and Gerdau MRM Steel v. United States, Court No.
98-08-02684 (Ridgeway, J.).

14. See September 24, 1999, Request for an Extension to File
Rebuttal Comments in the Sunset Reviews of Antidumping and
Countervailing Duty Orders: A-602-803; A-351-817; C-351-818, A-122-
822, A-122-823, A-405-802, A-588-826, A-421-804, A-455-802, A-485-
803, C-401-401, C-401-804, C-401-805, from Valerie S. Schindler,
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP, to Jeffrey A. May, Office
of Policy.

15. See September 30, 1999, Letter from Jeffrey A. May, Director,
Office of Policy to Valerie S. Schindler, Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom LLP.

16. See October 20, 1999, Memorandum for Jeffrey A. May, Re: Certain
Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Flat Plate from Canada: Adequacy of
Respondent Interested Party Response to the Notice of Initiation.

17. See Extension of Time Limit for Final Results of Expedited Five-
Year Reviews, 64 FR 71726 (December 22, 1999).

18. The Department notes, that subsequent to the October 1, 1999,
Substantive Response of Stelco, the Department determined that MRM
had not satisfied the requirements for revocation given that the
issue of MRM's alleged circumvention of the order remains unresolved
(see Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products and
Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada: Final Results
of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews, and Determination Not to
Revoke in Part, 65 FR 9243, 9245 (February 24, 2000).

19. See Certain Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products and
Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon Steel Plate from Canada: Final Results
of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews, and Determination Not to
Revoke in Part, 65 FR 9243, 9245 (February 24, 2000).
