
   DENNIS LYNCH, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. DANIEL DONNELLY, ET AL.

   No. 82-1256

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1982

   On Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the
First Circuit

   Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae supporting reversal

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Interest of the United States
   Introduction and summary of argument
   Argument:
      The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment was
      not intended to prohibit governmental acknowledgment of
      religion as a part of our Nation's heritage
      A. The historical evidence shows that the Establishment
         Clause of the First Amendment was not intended to exclude
         religion from our public occasions
      B. This Court's Establishment Clause decisions do not
         forbid the government to acknowledge our religious
         heritage
   Conclusion

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether a municipality's inclusion of a nativity scene in an annual
traditional Christmas celebration violates the Establishment Clause of
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.

                     INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES

   The City of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, has, for the past 40 years,
included a small nativity scene as part of an elaborate annual display
connected with the celebration of Christmas.  The courts below held
that the City's practice violates the Establishment Clause of the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution.  The United States
has a substantial interest in this matter, which raises the question
whether the Constitution requires us rigidly to exclude from our
public ceremonies and celebrations all acknowledgments of the
religious elements in our national traditions.

   The United States, like the City of Pawtucket and countless other
state and local governments, has long participated in the celebration
of the Christmas season.  Congress has declared Christmas to be a
national holiday (5 U.S.C. (& Supp. V) 6103), and the United States
has in past years sponsored Christmas pageants that included nativity
scenes.  See Allen v. Hickel, 424 F.2d 944 (D.C. Cir. 1970);  Allen v.
Morton, 495 F.2d 65 (D.C. Cir. 1973).  Since the days of the Pilgrims,
we have devoted, as a Nation, one day every year to giving thanks to
God.  More broadly, the federal government has, from the earliest days
of the Republic to the present, felt free to acknowledge and recognize
that religion is a part of our heritage and should continue to be an
element in our public life and public occasions.  The United States
has a deep and abiding interest in maintaining this long-standing
tradition.

                 INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   Woodenly applying legal tests devised for different situations, the
court of appeals here invalidated a traditional form of public
celebration, one that cannot sensibly be perceived as a serious threat
to the fundamental values protected by the First Amendment.  Our
submission is that it was not the purpose of the Framers of the
Constitution to require government wholly and rigidly to exclude
religion from our public occasions.  Indeed, this Court has long
assumed that traditional acknowledgements of the religious elements of
our heritage fit comfortably within the zone of permissible
governmental interaction with religion.  A contrary conclusion, such
as that reached by the court of appeals, does not further the
principles of the First Amendment.  Instead, it mandates an artificial
and undesirable sterility in public life, in which one important and
enriching aspect of our history and culture is treated as illegitimate
and therefore nonexistent.  Excising religion from our public
commemorations is not only not required by the Constitution, but runs
counter to this Court's teachings that government should
"accommodate() the public service to (our people's) spiritual needs."
Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306, 314 (1952).

   In our view, the court of appeals erred in its assumption that
Establishment Clause doctrines developed by this Court in other
contexts must be mechanistically applied to the very different
question presented by this case.  The "strict scrutiny" test
enunciated in Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S. 228 (1982), and applied by
the court of appeals in this case, was conceived in the context of a
state statute that placed onerous legal obligations on "unpopular"
religious denominations.  The inclusion of a traditional nativity
scene in a large civic display, designed to provide public
participation in the celebration of the Christmas holiday, is not such
a religious preference at all;  it is simply a natural acknowledgment
of the fact that the holiday includes a religious aspect.

   The familiar three-part test of Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602,
612-613 (1971), also seems inapposite and artificial here -- although
petitioners' brief shows that Pawtucket's practice does meet that
test.  The traditional religious references and reminders that fill
American public life should not depend, for their validity, on the
dubious assertion that they are wholly perfunctory and meaningless.
It was never the purpose of the Framers to secularize our public life
so rigidly that we cannot continue to mark our public holidays in a
manner that includes traditional acknowledgments of their religious
character.  We therefore ask the Court to rule that the First
Amendment does not mandate the contrived exclusion of religion from
our public life exemplified by the opinion of the court of appeals,
holding that, if government is to participate in commemorating
Christmas at all, it must somehow ignore or conceal the holiday's
religious significance.

                               ARGUMENT

 THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE OF THE FIRST AMENDMENT WAS NOT INTENDED TO
PROHIBIT GOVERNMENTAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RELIGION AS A PART OF OUR
NATION'S HERITAGE

 A. The Historical Evidence Shows That The Establishment Clause Of The
First Amendment Was Not Intended To Exclude Religion From Our Public
Occasions

   1. This Court's "Establishment Clause precedents have recognized
the special relevance in this area of Justice Holmes' comment that 'a
page of history is worth a volume of logic.'" Committee for Public
Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist, 413 U.S. 756, 777 n.33
(1973), quoting New York Trust Co. v. Eisner, 256 U.S. 345, 349
(1921).  See also Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. 664, 675-676
(1970).  The Court has been sensitive to the fact that history sheds
light on the meaning of the Establishment and Free Exercise Clauses
and their application to particular circumstances;  it has steadfastly
"declined to construe the Religion Clauses with a literalness that
would undermine the ultimate constitutional objective as illuminated
by history" (397 U.S. at 671;  emphasis added).  See, e.g., McGowan v.
Maryland, 366 U.S. 420, 431 (1961) (history of Sunday Closing Laws
relevant to Establishment Clause inquiry);  Everson v. Board of
Education, 330 U.S. 1, 8-16 (1947) (history of period when
Establishment Clause was fashioned and adopted is relevant to
determination of validity of modern state law authorizing
reimbursement for student transportation to private schools).

   What was the Framers' purpose in providing that "Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof * * *"?  At the time the amendment reached
the floor of the House of Representatives, it read:  "(N)o religion
shall be established by law nor shall the equal rights of conscience
be infringed." 1 Cong. Deb. 757 (1834) (hereinafter cited as
"Debates").  This language prompted concern among some representatives
that the amendment would prohibit nondiscriminatory state aid to
religion;  others read it as perhaps suggesting an even broader
prohibition.  /1/ James Madison, who played a leading role in the
drafting and adoption of the First Amendment, /2/ sought to quiet such
concerns by explaining (1 Debates 757) that:

      (H)e apprehended the meaning of the words to be, that Congress
      should not establish a religion, and enforce the legal
      observation of it by law, nor compel men to worship God in any
      manner contrary to their conscience.

   During the course of debate, the language of the amendment was
changed to its current form.  See Everson v. Board of Education,
supra, 330 U.S. at 39 n.27 (Rutledge, J., dissenting).  Throughout the
debates, however, Congress adhered to the central purposes set forth
by Madison:  Congress may not establish a national church, may not
prefer one sect over another, and may not compel worship contrary to
conscience.  See 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the
United States Section 1871 (1833).  /3/

   On the other hand, there is no evidence whatever that the Framers
contemplated a contrived exclusion of religion from our public life or
sought to disable the State from acknowledging that religion is an
important part of our heritage.  As the Court correctly observed in
Zorach v. Clauson, supra, 343 U.S. at 312, "(t)he First Amendment * *
* does not say that in every and all respects there shall be a
separation of Church and State." Nor was the Establishment Clause so
understood by the Framers themselves.

   2. Both before and after the drafting and enactment of the
Establishment Clause, governmental acknowledgment of a Supreme Being
was a naturally accepted feature of American public life.  Government
officials invoked the name of God, asked His blessings upon our
Nation, and encouraged our people to do the same.  The Declaration of
Independence, now enshrined in the National Archives, proclaims it
"self-evident that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by
their Creator with certain unalienable Rights * * *." The Republic was
established, the authors of the Declaration wrote, "appealing to the
Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions" and
"with a firm reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence * * *."

   In September 1774, the delegates to the first session of the
Continental Congress resolved on the second day of proceedings to open
the next day's meeting with a prayer by an invited clergyman -- the
Reverend Jacob Duche.  1 Journals of the Continental Congress 26
(1774) (hereinafter cited as "Journals").  Reverend Duche continued to
deliver prayers to the Continental Congress during the following two
years.  See 2 Journals 12, 13 (1775);  5 Journals 530 (1776).  When he
resigned from the office of Chaplain, he was succeeded by two new
chaplains (6 Journals 1034 (1776)), and eight years later the
Continental Congress decided that chaplains should be elected annually
(27 Journals 683 (1784)).

   In 1787, Benjamin Franklin, no adherent of religious orthodoxy,
proposed that each day's session of the Constitutional Convention be
opened with a prayer (5 J. Elliot, Debates on the Adoption of The
Federal Constitution 254 (2d ed. 1836)):

         I have lived, sir, a long time, and, the longer I live, the
      more convincing proofs I see of this truth -- that God governs
      in the affairs of men.

                      * * *

         I therefore beg leave to move that henceforth, prayers
      imploring the assistance of Heaven, and its blessings on our
      deliberations, be held in this assembly every morning * * *.
      /4/

   When George Washington was inaugurated as our first President, he
went, accompanied by both Houses of Congress, to St. Paul's Chapel in
New York City for a concluding religious service conducted by the
first Episcopal bishop of New York.  See A. Stokes & L. Pfeffer,
Church and State in the United States 87 (rev. 1st ed. 1964).  The
decision to hold the service was the product of a joint resolution
adopted by both houses of Congress (ibid.).  Similarly, the First
Congress, which drafted and adopted the First Amendment,
simultaneously retained chaplains to offer public prayers at the
beginning of each legislative day.  See 1 Journal of the Senate, 1st
Cong., 1st Sess. 10 (1789);  1 Journal of the House of
Representatives, 1st Cong., 1st Sess. 11-12 (1789);  Act of Sept. 22,
1789, ch. 17, Section 4, 1 Stat. 71.

   Thanksgiving and fast-day proclamations also were common before and
after ratification of the First Amendment.  John Adams described one
such fast-day proclamation in a letter to his wife, Abigail Adams
(reprinted in A. Stokes & L. Pfeffer, supra, at 83):

      We have appointed a Continental fast.  Millions will be upon
      their Knees at once before their Great Creator, imploring His
      forgiveness and blessing;  His smiles on American Councils and
      arms.

   The day after proposing the First Amendment, Congress called on
President Washington to proclaim "a day of public thanksgiving and
prayer, to be observed by acknowledging with grateful hearts, the many
and signal favours of Almighty God." Id. at 87.  The President
responded by proclaiming November 26, 1789, as a day of thanksgiving
on which to "offer() our prayers and supplications to the great Lord
and Ruler of Nations, and beseech Him to pardon our national and other
transgressions * * *." 1 J. Richardson, A Compilation of the Messages
and Papers of the Presidents, 1789-1897, at 64 (1896-1899).
Washington continued this practice on other occasions during his
Administration, see id. at 179-180, as did other Founding Fathers who
later served as President.  /5/

   It thus seems obvious that the men responsible for the drafting and
enactment of the Establishment Clause never contemplated that they
were eradicating religious traditions from American public life.
Indeed, Story stated that at the time of the adoption of the First
Amendment, "(a)n attempt to level all religions, and to make it a
matter of state policy to hold all in utter indifference, would have
created universal disapprobation, if not universal indignation." 3 J.
Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States, supra,
at Section 1868.

   The words and actions of the Founding Fathers and the First
Congress are, of course, of special significance.  This Court has
observed that the First Congress "was a Congress whose constitutional
decisions have always been regarded, as they should be regarded, as of
the greatest weight in the interpretation of that fundamental
instrument." Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 174-175 (1926).
Accord United States v. Villamonte-Marquez, No. 81-1350 (June 17,
1983), slip op. 6-7;  United States v. Ramsey, 431 U.S. 606, 616-617
(1977);  Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616, 623 (1886).  As the
Court went on to say in Myers (272 U.S. at 175):

      This Court has repeatedly laid down the principle that a
      contemporaneous legislative exposition of the Constitution when
      the founders of our Government and framers of our Constitution
      were actively participating in public affairs, acquiesced in for
      a long term of years, fixes the construction to be given its
      provisions.

   There is no good reason to depart from this wise principle in this
case.  The Framers of the Establishment Clause obviously thought it
both natural and constitutional for government to acknowledge our
religious heritage and participate in celebrations that include a
religious element.  Although Christmas itself was not widely
celebrated in this country before the 1800's and did not become a
national holiday until 1870 (see Pet. App. A15 to A16), the Framers
clearly participated in the official and public celebration of
Thanksgiving -- a day dedicated, after all, to giving of thanks to
God.  The creation and maintenance of legislative chaplaincies, and
the frequent invocation of God's blessing on all of the Nation's
public and ceremonial occasions, also demonstrate that the Framers
would have been confounded and astonished by the suggestion that
government is not free to acknowledge and help commemorate on occasion
such as Christmas or that, in doing so, it must somehow contrive to
conceal and ignore the holiday's religious aspects.

   3. Today, as in the earliest days of the Republic, the government
continues to recognize that our Nation's heritage includes a religious
element.  Coins have borne the legend "In God we trust" since 1865 (31
U.S.C. 324a), and this phrase was made the national motto in 1956 (36
U.S.C. 186).  /6/ The House Report stated (H.R. Rep. No. 1959, 84th
Cong., 2d Sess. 2 (1956)):  "It will be of great spiritual and
psychological value to our country to have a clearly designated
national motto of inspirational quality * * *." In 1950, Congress
designated Memorial Day as a day of "prayer for a permanent peace" (36
U.S.C. 169g).  In 1952, Congress directed the President to proclaim a
National Day of Prayer each year (36 U.S.C. 169h).  In 1954, Congress
added the words "under God" to the Pledge of Allegiance (36 U.S.C.
172).  The House Judiciary Committee explained that the words were
added to acknowledge our religious heritage (H.R. Rep. No. 1693, 83d
Cong., 2d Sess. 3 (1954)):

      This is not an act establishing a religion or one interfering
      with the "free exercise" of religion.  A distinction must be
      made between the existence of a religion as an institution and a
      belief in the sovereignty of God.  The phrase "under God"
      recognizes only the guidance of God in our national affairs.

   Many patriotic songs similarly acknowledge our dependence upon God
and invoke His blessings.  One stanza from the National Anthem (36
U.S.C. 170) includes the phrases, "May the heav'n rescued land Praise
the Pow'r that hath made and preserved us a nation" and "this be our
motto, 'In God is our Trust.'" The fourth stanza of "America"
proclaims:

         Our fathers' God, to Thee, Author of Liberty, to Thee we

         sing.

         Long may our Land be bright with freedom's holy light,

         Protect us by Thy might, great God our King.

   As in Washington's day, Presidential proclamations and messages
continue to mark Thanksgiving as a day of prayer.  /7/ These
Presidential proclamations invoke the religious aspects of our
national heritage without embarrassment.  President Roosevelt's 1944
Thanksgiving Day Proclamation offers a particularly vivid example
(Proclamation No. 2629, 9 Fed. Reg. 13099 (1944)):

         (I)t is fitting that we give thanks with special fervor to
      our Heavenly Father for the mercies we have received
      individually and as a nation and for the blessings He has
      restored, through the victories of our arms and those of our
      Allies, to His children in other lands.

                      * * *

         To the end that we may bear more earnest witness to our
      gratitude to Almighty God, I suggest a nationwide reading of the
      Holy Scriptures during the period from Thanksgiving Day to
      Christmas.  Let every man of every creed go to his own version
      of the Scriptures for a renewed and strengthening contact with
      these eternal truths and majestic principles which have inspired
      such measure of true greatness as this nation has achieved.

   Presidential proclamations and messages also have issued to
commemorate Jewish Heritage Week (Proclamation No. 4844, 46 Fed. Reg.
25077 (1981)) and the Jewish High Holy Days (17 Weekly Comp. Pres.
Doc. 1058 (Sept. 29, 1981)).  Congress recently called upon the
President to proclaim 1983 as the "'Year of the Bible' in recognition
of both the formative influence the Bible has been for our Nation, and
our national need to study and apply the teachings of the Holy
Scriptures" (Pub. L. No. 97-280, 96 Stat. 1211).  On February 3, 1983,
the President did in fact proclaim 1983 to be the "Year of the Bible"
(Proclamation No. 5018, 48 Fed. Reg. 5527 (1983)).  /8/

   Similarly, when Presidents make public statements in connection
with the celebration of Christmas, they naturally and frequently
include references to the fact that this is a religious celebration as
well as a secular holiday.  /9/ A nativity scene has been displayed in
the East Room of the White House at least since the time of the
Trumans and perhaps even longer.  In federally-financed chapels on
military bases, in hospitals, prisons and at our Service Academies,
Christmas is celebrated as a religious event for those who adhere to
the Christian religion.  Federally-funded museums display religious
art and traditional symbols, and the Postal Service issues seasonal
postage stamps that reproduce religious paintings.  See Allen v.
Hickel, 424 F.2d 944, 949 (D.C. Cir. 1970).

   Finally, government buildings and monuments are filled with
religious language and imagery, from the nearly omnipresent "Anno
Domini" chiseled into cornerstones, to the depiction of the Ten
Commandments in the frieze facing every lawyer who addresses this
Court.  Religious subjects are depicted in murals in the library and
outside the Great Hall of the Department of Justice.  /10/

   Further elaboration is surely unnecessary;  we remind the Court
simply of its own well-known observation in Zorach v. Clauson, supra,
343 U.S. at 313, that "(w)e are a religious people whose institutions
presuppose a Supreme Being."

         B. This Court's Establishment Clause Decisions Do Not Forbid
      The Government To Acknowledge Our Religious Heritage

   1. As this Court has observed in an Establishment Clause context,
using the words of Justice Holmes:  "'If a thing has been practised
for two hundred years by common consent, it will need a strong case
for the Fourteenth Amendment to affect it.'" Walz v. Tax Commission,
supra, 397 U.S. at 678, quoting Jackman v. Rosenbaum Co., 260 U.S. 22,
31 (1922).  For this reason, no doubt, the Court has long assumed that
it is valid to continue to make traditional use of religious symbols
in government.  For example, in Engel v. Vitale, supra, 370 U.S. at
435 n.21, the Court noted:

      There is of course nothing in the decision reached here that is
      inconsistent with the fact that * * * there are many
      manifestations in our public life of belief in God.  Such
      patriotic or ceremonial occasions bear no true resemblance to
      the unquestioned religious exercise that the State of New York
      has sponsored in this instance.

   Similarly, in Abington School District v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203,
213 (1963), the Court stated:

      This background (of the Founding Fathers' religious devotion) is
      evidenced today in our public life through the continuance in
      our oaths of office from the Presidency to the Alderman of the
      final supplication, "So help me God." Likewise each House of
      Congress provides through its Chaplain an opening prayer, and
      the sessions of this Court are declared open by the crier in a
      short ceremony, the final phrase of which invokes the grace of
      God.  /11/

   Commentators, too, have recognized the constitutionality of
governmental celebration of our religious heritage.  The point was
made most vividly by Dean Erwin N. Griswold (Griswold, Absolute Is In
the Dark -- A Discussion of the Approach of the Supreme Court to
Constitutional Questions, 8 Utah L. Rev. 167, 174 (1963)):

         (T)o say that (the First Amendment) require(s) that all trace
      of religion be kept out of any sort of public activity is sheer
      invention.  Our history is full of these traces * * *.  Must all
      of these things be rigorously extirpated in order to satisfy a
      constitutional absolutism?  What about Sunday?  What about
      Christmas?  Must we deny our whole heritage, our culture, the
      things of spirit and soul which have sustained us in the past
      and helped to bind us together in times of good and bad?

         Does our deep-seated tolerance of all religions -- or, to the
      same extent, of no religion -- require that we give up all
      religious observance in public activities?  Why should it?  It
      certainly never occurred to the Founders that it would.

   What has concerned the Court are those government practices that,
it found, coerce religious orthodoxy or inescapably have that effect
(e.g., Stone v. Graham, 449 U.S. 39, 42 (1980)).  The Court has also
condemned practices that it found to involve the government directly
and unequivocally in religious exercises (e.g., Abington School
District v. Schempp, supra, 373 U.S. at 223-224).  But for the
government to participate in holiday celebrations that have religious
as well as secular elements, and in that context to acknowledge our
religious heritage, is not a "religious exercise," or an interference
with the rights of conscience of non-believers.  /12/ Nor have such
practices "given the remotest sign of leading to an established church
or religion" (Walz v. Tax Commission, supra, 397 U.S. at 678).  /13/
In fact it is, precisely, our tradition of toleration that suggests
that government should be allowed to give some recognition to the
belief of many of our people that religion should continue to play
some role in our public occasions.

   2. Jefferson's celebrated reference to a "wall of separation
between church and State" may suggest that all of these governmental
acknowledgments of religion must be condemned.  But the Court has
recognized that "(i)t has never been thought either possible or
desirable to enforce a regime of total separation." Committee for
Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist, supra, 413 U.S. at
760.  Such "total separation" would clearly require an elaborate
effort to reshape our practices and rhetoric, one that would betoken a
systematic hostility to religion -- in effect, the establishment of
irreligion.  But hostility toward religion is as prohibited by the
Constitution as is governmental establishment of religion.  See, e.g.,
Abington School District v. Schempp, supra, 374 U.S. at 306 (Goldberg,
J., concurring);  Zorach v. Clauson, supra, 343 U.S. at 314;  Illinois
ex rel. McCollum v. Board of Education, 333 U.S. 203, 211-212 (1948).

   Instead, government's proper role is one of "benevolent neutrality"
toward religion, in which "there is room for play in the joints." Walz
v. Tax Commission, supra, 397 U.S. at 669.  Religion is inextricably
imbedded in our national culture and our official holidays and
ceremonies.  It pervades our public as well as our private lives
because of our history and because recognition of this aspect of our
history is of deep concern to many of our people.  To ignore this
heritage and this deeply felt concern by eradicating all evidence of
its influence would be to substitute "callous indifference" for
"benevolent neutrality." Zorach v. Clauson, supra, 343 U.S. at 314;
Walz v. Tax Commission, supra, 397 U.S. at 669.  /14/

   3. What does "benevolent neutrality" call for in the context of
this case?  We must recognize that Christmas has become, in part, a
secular celebration.  But its meaning is also religious, and it is its
religious meaning that is commemorated by millions of Americans
through services and through worship.  Must government mark Christmas
by pretending that it is purely secular, as required by the court of
appeals?  Does the Constitution require government either to cease
celebrating Christmas altogether, or to make affirmative efforts to
distort its participation in those celebrations by extirpating all
references to the events that Christmas commemorates?  In our
submission, the First Amendment simply does not require such
artificial bowdlerization and aesthetic impoverishment of our public
life.

   Moreover, the courts below certainly failed to consider the
Pawtucket nativity scene in the context of its display.  As
demonstrated by the record (see Pet. Br. 3-5), the creche is simply
one part of the City's multi-faceted Christmas display.  The entire
celebration combines all of the elements of a traditional American
Christmas.  The Constitution does not require government to excise one
element or to pretend that it no longer exists.  As Judge Campbell
recognized in dissent (Pet. App. A19):

      It seems a little like maintaining a holiday known as
      "Washington's Birthday" while extirpating all reference to
      George Washington.  Christmas, so long as called by that name,
      inescapably recalls the birth of the founder of Christianity.
      To "save" it by pretending to the contrary has an almost
      Orwellian twist.  I do not think that constitutional values are
      furthered by this kind of thinking.

   4. We believe that the court of appeals was led astray by its
assumption that doctrinal formulations developed by this Court in
other contexts must be woodenly applied in all Establishment Clause
cases.  Justice Powell reminded us in Wolman v. Walter, 433 U.S. 229,
263 (1977) (Powell, J., concurring in part, concurring in the judgment
in part, and dissenting in part), that "analytical tidiness" must
sometimes be sacrificed in order to avoid "blind absolutism."
Similarly, Justice Reed observed that "(d)evotion to the great
principle of religious liberty should not lead us into a rigid
interpretation of the constitutional guarantee that conflicts with
accepted habits of our people." Illinois ex rel McCollum v. Board of
Education, supra, 333 U.S. at 256 (Reed, J., dissenting).

   a. In its zeal for "analytical tidiness," the court of appeals
concluded (Pet. App. A11) that it was bound to review the practice
challenged in this case under the "strict scrutiny" test enunciated in
Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S. 228 (1982).  That test was formulated in
the context of a state statute that imposed onerous legal obligations
on some religions but not on others;  the Court stated that the
statute "clearly grant(ed) denominational preferences of the sort
consistently and firmly deprecated in (the Court's) precedents."
Larson v. Valente, supra, 456 U.S. at 246 (footnote omitted).  /15/ We
believe that the inclusion of a manger scene as part of a large
traditional civic display is not a "denominational preference" at all
and that application of the Larson "strict scrutiny" test in this
situation is confusing and inapposite.  To recognize that Christmas
has something to do with the birth of Christ is not to "prefer"
Christianity over other religions, but simply to acknowledge its
constituent meaning.  To state that government may not prefer one
religion over another does not mean that government must pretend that
religious holidays have no specific meanings to different religions.
/16/ Religious pluralism does not require government to establish an
official, homogenized, all-purpose form of religion of its own.  By
its ceremonial participation in the celebration of a Christian
holiday, government does not "establish" Christianity and does not
discriminate against other religions.  It certainly does not act in
any way to disfavor unpopular or unconventional religious views -- the
vice perceived by the Court in Larson.  The Larson analysis should not
be extended to wholly dissimilar situations posing no comparable
threat to religious pluralism.  /17/

   b. The practice challenged in this case could be analyzed under the
Court's now familiar three-part test, which requires that governmental
action (1) "must have a secular legislative purpose";  (2) must have a
"principal or primary effect * * * that neither advances nor inhibits
religion";  and (3) "must not foster 'an excessive government
entanglement with religion.'" Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602, 612-613
(1971).  And petitioners have demonstrated that Pawtucket's practice
fits comfortably within that test (see Pet. Br. 24-41).  /18/ We
suggest, however, that the three-part test (just like the strict
scrutiny test) results in analytic overkill when applied to the type
of government action under consideration here.  As already noted, the
Court has long assumed that syllogistic doctrinal analysis is
unnecessary for the validation of certain traditional aspects of
American public life even when these carry unmistakably religious
overtones.  The Court recently stated in another context, in applying
the four-part test for determining whether an implied cause of action
had been created by a particular statute, that "there is no need for
us to 'trudge through all four of the factors when the dispositive
question of legislative intent has been resolved.'" Merrill Lynch,
Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc. v. Curran, 456 U.S. 353, 388 (1982),
quoting California v. Sierra Club, 451 U.S. 287, 302 (1981)
(Rehnquist, J., concurring in the judgment).  Here, too, there is no
need to "trudge through" the three parts of the Lemon test when it is
clear that the challenged practice is not among the evils against
which the Establishment Clause was directed.

   Moreover, application of the three-part test to traditional,
ceremonial activities of the type involved in this case tempts courts
to engage in hypocrisy.  It should not be necessary for a court to
assert that the traditional religious references that fill American
official life have lost all religious significance in order to uphold
them.  This Court's sessions are opened by the traditional cry, "God
save the United States and this honorable Court." Are we to say that
the constitutional validity of this plea depends on it being wholly
perfunctory, a piece of meaningless boilerplate?  The fact that some
-- maybe many -- actually understand this to be a plea for God's
blessing should not force us to the unwelcome and unnecessary
conclusion that the plea must be silenced.  Similarly, a rigid
application of the "secular purpose" inquiry should not force us to
change our national motto from "In God We Trust" to "E pluribus unum"
(an alternative considered and rejected by Congress).  See H.R. Rep.
No. 1959, supra, at 2.  As we have demonstrated, it was never the
purpose of the Framers to secularize government activities to the
extent suggested by a literalistic and wooden reading of the Lemon
language.  The creche is one of the traditional symbols of a national
holiday.  It also retains religious significance.  Courts should not
be required to distort our past by pretending that such symbols have
been "sanitized" by loss of all their religious meaning, so that it is
now "safe" to display them.

   Similarly, the "effect" component of the Lemon test seems excessive
and even unworkable in the present context.  It should not be
necessary, for example, for courts to receive the testimony of a
parade of psychologists, sociologists and philosophers, offering their
subjective opinions on the "effect" of viewing religious symbols in
particular contexts (see J.A. 71-90;  115-119;  122-124;  140-144),
before reaching the conclusion that displays such as Pawtucket's do
not constitute an establishment of religion.

   Finally, as the court of appeals itself recognized (Pet. App. A12),
the "excessive entanglement" inquiry is of limited utility here.  In
Lemon, the Court was concerned with the sort of administrative
entanglement that might accompany financial support for parochial
schools (403 U.S. at 619).  No such problems arise when government
acknowledges religion as a constituent part of our heritage.  In fact,
the district court in this case acknowledged the absence of
administrative entanglement (Pet. App. A71);  however, it stated that
the challenged practice had caused "political divisiveness" because
the City's ownership and display of the nativity scene had led to
"anger, hostility, name calling, and political maneuvering, all
prompted by the fact that someone had questioned the City's ownership
and display of a religious symbol" (id. at A71, A72).  The court of
appeals was unwilling to place much weight on this determination (id.
at A12), and rightfully so.  If divisiveness is to be the test, then
no religious symbol can withstand attack so long as the attack is
mounted with sufficient fervor and publicity.  In fact, the record
here shows that there was no divisiveness at all until the filing of
this lawsuit, less than a week before Christmas (J.A. 99, 105).

   In summary, this Court should recognize expressly, as it has
implicitly in the past, that the Establishment Clause does not prevent
government from marking our public holidays in a manner that includes
traditional references to and acknowledgments of their religious
character.

                              CONCLUSION

   The judgment of the court of appeals should be reversed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   REX E. LEE

      Solicitor General

   J. PAUL MCGRATH

      Assistant Attorney General

   PAUL M. BATOR

      Deputy Solicitor General

   CAROLYN B. KUHL

      Deputy Assistant Attorney General

   KATHRYN A. OBERLY

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   WILLIAM G. COLE

      Attorney

   JUNE 1983

   /1/ 1 Debates 757-760.  One representative voiced a fear that such
language "might be thought to have a tendency to abolish religion
altogether" (id. at 757).  Another expressed concern that "the words
might be taken in such latitude as to be extremely hurtful to the
cause of religion" (ibid.).

   /2/ See, e.g., Everson v. Board of Education, supra, 330 U.S. at
13;  id. at 28, 31-43 (Rutledge, J., dissenting).

   /3/ Congress also intended to prohibit the federal government from
interfering with the various established state religions existing at
the time of ratification of the First Amendment.  See McGowan v.
Maryland, supra, 366 U.S. at 440-441.  Nevertheless, the provisions of
the First Amendment have since been made applicable to the states by
incorporation into the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
 See, e.g., Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 303 (1940).

   /4/ For a number of reasons, Franklin's proposal was never adopted.
 Among other things, the delegates were concerned about the lack of
funds for a chaplain's pay and the fact that institution of a prayer
practice well after the start of the Convention might be taken as a
sign of desperation.  See 5 J. Elliott, supra, at 253-255;  A. Stokes
& L. Pfeffer, Church and State in the United States 84 (rev. 1st ed.
1964).

   /5/ John Adams issued at least two thanksgiving proclamations and
James Madison issued at least four.  See 1 J. Richardson, supra, at
268-270, 284-286, 513, 532-533, 558, 560-561.  Thomas Jefferson
thought such proclamations would violate the Constitution and did not
issue any.  See A. Stokes & L. Pfeffer, supra, at 88.  Nonetheless,
Jefferson later encouraged the establishment of denominational schools
of religion on or adjacent to the public University of Virginia campus
which would "offer the * * * advantage of enabling the students of the
University to attend religious exercises * * *." 19 The Writings of
Thomas Jefferson 415 (Memorial ed. 1904).  Jefferson also wrote:  "And
can the liberties of a Nation be thought secure when we have removed
their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the people that
these liberties are of the gift of God?" Reprinted in W. Berns, The
First Amendment and the Future of American Democracy 13-14 (1976).
See also Illinois ex rel. McCollum v. Board of Education, 333 U.S.
203, 246-247 (1948) (Reed, J., dissenting).

   /6/ The constitutionality of the use of this phrase was upheld in
Aronow v. United States, 432 F.2d 242 (9th Cir. 1970).  The court
explained (id. at 243) that:

         It is quite obvious that the national motto and the slogan on
      coinage and currency "In God We Trust" has nothing whatsoever to
      do with the establishment of religion.  Its use is of a
      patriotic or ceremonial character and bears no true resemblance
      to a governmental sponsorship of a religious exercise.

   /7/ See, e.g., Proclamation No. 4883, 46 Fed. Reg. 56153 (1981)
(Thanksgiving Day, 1981).  Virtually every President since Washington
has proclaimed a national day of prayer and thanksgiving.  See 3 A.
Stokes, Church and State in the United States 180-193 (1950).

   /8/ Constitutional challenges to the "Year of the Bible" are
pending in Zwerling v. Reagan, No. CV-83-2504-R (C.D. Cal.) and Gaylor
v. Reagan, No. 82-C-985-D (W.D. Wis.).

   /9/ See, e.g., Remarks on Lighting the National Community Christmas
Tree, 17 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc. 1389 (Dec. 17, 1981);  Remarks on
Lighting the National Community Christmas Tree, 16 Weekly Comp. Pres.
Doc. 2817 (Dec. 18, 1980);  Remarks Before Lighting the National
Community Christmas Tree, 3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc. 1730 (Dec. 15,
1967).

   /10/ Outside the Great Hall, for example, are large paintings of
Jesus, of Moses with the Ten Commandments, and of Thomas Aquinas,
along with portraits of secular legal luminaries such as Coke, Kent,
Solon, Socrates and Holmes.

   /11/ Individual Justices of this Court have expressed similar views
in separate concurring or dissenting opinions.  See Abington School
District v. Schempp, supra, 374 U.S. at 303-304 (Brennan, J.,
concurring);  Engel v. Vitale, supra, 370 U.S. at 446-450 (Stewart,
J., dissenting);  Illinois ex rel. McCollum v. Board of Education, 333
U.S. 203, 253-254 (Reed, J., dissenting).

   /12/ Cf. R. Morgan, The Supreme Court and Religion 23 (1972)
("'Freedom of conscience' as used by Madison and some others referred
specifically to the question whether or how one believed in God.  It
did not mean that the federal government could not force people to do
things or pay taxes for things which offended them, only that people
could not be coerced into making or contributing to any profession of
belief regarding a Supreme Being").

   /13/ Nor is it plausible to suggest that such government
celebrations are "but the 'foot in the door' or the 'nose of the camel
in the tent' leading to an established church" (Walz v. Tax
Commission, supra, 397 U.S. at 678).  If government celebrations of
our religious heritage "can be seen as the first step toward
'establishment' of religion, * * * the second step has been long in
coming.  Any move that realistically 'establishes' a church or tends
to do so can be dealt with 'while this Court sits'" (ibid.).

   /14/ A perceptive reminder that "neutrality" in this context is a
subtle and problematical concept was provided by Sir Walter Moberly,
in the context of debate over the role of religion in the English
public universities (W. Moberly, The Crisis in the University 55-56
(1949));

      On the fundamental religious issue (the existence of God), the
      modern university intends to be, supposes it is, neutral, but it
      is not.  Certainly it neither inculcates nor expressly
      repudiates belief in God.  But it does what is far more deadly
      than open rejection;  it ignores Him * * *.  It is a fallacy to
      suppose that by omitting a subject you teach nothing about it.
      On the contrary, you teach that it is to be omitted * * *.  And
      you teach this not openly and explicitly, which would invite
      criticism;  you simply take it for granted and thereby insinuate
      it silently, insidiously, and all but irresistibly * * *.

   /15/ Larson involved a Minnesota statute granting preferential
treatment to the well-established churches that receive more than half
of their charitable contributions from their members.  Other, less
entrenched religious organizations were to be subjected to various
registration and reporting requirements.  In striking down the
statute, the Court noted that the law "was drafted with the explicit
intention of including particular religious denominations and
excluding others" (456 U.S. at 254).  One state senator explained that
"'what you're trying to get at here is the people that are running
around airports and running around streets and soliciting people and
you're trying to remove them from the exemption that normally applies
to religious organizations'" (ibid., quoting legislative history on
file with the Court).

   /16/ A nativity scene of course acknowledges Christian traditions
that are not shared by all religions.  But that result is inescapable
once we decide that government may participate at all in the
commemoration of Christmas.  It is simply not possible for government
to give uniform recognition to all religions in the context of
commemorating one religion's particular holiday.  By analogy, the
court of appeals would presumably invalidate government's recognition
of Jewish holidays (see page 13, supra) because the heritage of a
single religious group is singled out for special mention.  To say
that government must acknowledge all religions whenever it mentions
one simply makes no sense.

   /17/ Recently, the Larson "strict scrutiny" test was held to be
inapplicable in a case involving an Establishment Clause challenge to
a state's decision to permit a large, lighted cross to be erected on
state park lands.  ACLU v. Rabun County, 698 F.2d 1098, 1109 n.20
(11th Cir. 1983).  The court noted that "no evidence has been
presented concerning the state's refusal to approve construction of
symbolic expressions of religion other than Christianity in state
parklands" (ibid.), and concluded that the absence of such evidence
rendered the Larson test inapplicable.  Here, too, the record contains
no evidence of petitioners' refusal to acknowledge the special
occasions marked by other religious groups;  on the contrary, the
Mayor of Pawtucket testified to his willingness to display a menorah
as part of the City's annual holiday celebration (J.A. 104).

   /18/ The constitutionality of government-sponsored nativity scenes
has been adjudicated by other courts under the three-part test.  In
Citizens Concerned for Separation of Church & State v. City & County
of Denver, 526 F. Supp. 1310 (D. Colo. 1981), the court upheld
Denver's nativity display which, like that of petitioners' is part of
an annual Christmas celebration.  The court found that the display,
including the creche, had a secular legislative purpose (id. at 1311),
that it was "not an endorsement by the City of the Christian faith,
but rather one of general celebration of the holiday season" (id. at
1315), and that no entanglement problems were present (ibid.).

   In Allen v. Morton, 495 F.2d 65 (D.C. Cir. 1973), the court
reviewed the federal government's participation in the annual
Christmas Pageant of Peace, held each year on the Ellipse.  The court
ruled that the Pageant had a secular purpose (id. at 68-70), and that
the inclusion of a creche had no more than a "remote and incidental
effect" on religion (id. at 70-74).  Nevertheless, the court held that
the government's participation in the Pageant would have to be
restructured because its association with the Pageant's co-sponsor, a
private, non-profit corporation that included professional clerics on
its board, had engendered excessive administrative entanglements.  In
particular, the government had become involved in conflicts among
representatives of various religious groups represented on the board
(id. at 74-75).

   In response to the Allen decision, the Pageant of Peace has been
restructured.  The Pageant itself no longer includes a nativity scene
in its display, but the National Park Service issues demonstration
permits (see 36 C.F.R. 50.19) to private groups that display a variety
of religious symbols, including a nativity scene and a menorah, in
areas adjacent to the Pageant.  The present arrangement, which has
never been challenged, is consistent with this Court's decision in
Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981).  See also O'Hair v. Andrus,
613 F.2d 931 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (rejecting Establishment Clause
challenge to a Papal Mass conducted on the Mall under permit from the
Park Service).
