Douglas Isbell 
Headquarters, Washington, DC                 September 15, 1998 
(Phone:  202/358-1753)

Jane Platt
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA
(Phone:  818/354-5011)

David Brand
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
(Phone:  607/ 255-3651)

RELEASE:  98-167

GALILEO FINDS JUPITER'S RINGS FORMED 
BY DUST BLASTED OFF SMALL MOONS

     Jupiter's intricate, swirling ring system is formed by dust 
kicked up as interplanetary meteoroids smash into the giant 
planet's four small inner moons, according to scientists studying 
data from NASA's Galileo spacecraft.  Images sent by Galileo also 
reveal that the outermost ring is actually two rings, one embedded 
within the other. 

    The findings were announced today by scientists from Cornell 
University, Ithaca, NY, and the National Optical Astronomy 
Observatories (NOAO), Tucson, AZ, at a news briefing held at 
Cornell. 

    "We now know the source of Jupiter's ring system and how it 
works," said Cornell astronomer Dr. Joseph Burns, who reported on 
the first detailed analysis of a planet's ring system, along with 
Maureen Ockert-Bell and Dr. Joseph Veverka of Cornell, and Dr. 
Michael Belton of NOAO. 

     "Rings are important dynamical laboratories to look at the 
processes that probably went on billions of years ago when the 
Solar System was forming from a flattened disk of dust and gas," 
Burns explained.  Furthermore, similar faint rings probably are 
associated with many small moons of the Solar System's other giant 
planets.  "I expect we will see similar processes at Saturn and 
the other giant planets," Burns said. 

     In the late 1970s, NASA's two Voyager spacecraft first 
revealed the structure of Jupiter's rings:  a flattened main ring 
and an inner, cloud-like ring, called the halo, both composed of 
small, dark particles.  One Voyager image seemed to indicate a 
third, faint outer ring.  New Galileo data reveal that this third 
ring, known as the gossamer ring because of its transparency, 
consists of two rings.  One is embedded within the other, and both 
are composed of microscopic debris from two small moons, Amalthea 
and Thebe. 

     "For the first time we can see the gossamer-bound dust coming 
off Amalthea and Thebe, and we now believe it is likely that the 
main ring comes from Adrastea and Metis," Burns said.  "The 
structure of the gossamer rings was totally unexpected," Belton 
added.  "These images provide one of the most significant 
discoveries of the entire Galileo imaging experiment." 

     Galileo took three dozen images of the rings and small moons 
during three orbits of Jupiter in 1996 and 1997.  The four moons 
display "bizarre surfaces of undetermined composition that appear 
very dark, red and heavily cratered from meteoroid impacts," 
Veverka said.  The rings contain very tiny particles resembling 
dark, reddish soot.  Unlike Saturn's rings, there are no signs of 
ice in Jupiter's rings. 

     Scientists believe that dust is kicked off the small moons 
when they are struck by interplanetary meteoroids, or fragments of 
comets and asteroids, at speeds greatly magnified by Jupiter's 
huge gravitational field, like the cloud of chalk dust that rises 
when two erasers are banged together.  The small moons are 
particularly vulnerable targets because of their relative 
closeness to the giant planet. 

     "In these impacts, the meteoroid is going so fast it buries 
itself deep in the moon, then vaporizes and explodes, causing 
debris to be thrown off at such high velocity that it escapes the 
satellite's gravitational field," Burns said.  If the moon is too 
big, dust particles will not have enough velocity to escape the 
moon's gravitational field.  With a diameter of just five miles 
(eight kilometers) and an orbit that lies just at the periphery of 
the main ring, tiny Adrastea is "most perfectly suited for the 
job." 

     As dust particles are blasted off the moons, they enter 
orbits much like those of their source satellites, both in their 
size and in their slight tilt relative to Jupiter's equatorial 
plane.  A tilted orbit wobbles around a planet's equator, much 
like a hula hoop twirling around a person's waist.  This close to 
Jupiter, orbits wobble back and forth in only a few months. 

     Jupiter's diameter is approximately 86,000 miles (143,000 
kilometers).  The ring system begins about 55,000 miles (92,000 
kilometers) from Jupiter's center and extends to about 150,000 
miles (250,000 kilometers) from the planet. 

     Galileo has been orbiting Jupiter and its moons for 2 1/2 
years, and is currently in the midst of a two-year extension, 
known as the Galileo Europa Mission.  JPL manages the Galileo 
mission for NASA's Office of Space Science, Washington, DC.  JPL 
is a division of Caltech, Pasadena, CA.  The new images, and 
further information on this discovery and the Galileo mission, are 
available on the Internet at the Galileo website: 
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/galileo or at the Cornell website:  
http://www.news.cornell.edu/releases/sept98/jupiter_rings.html 
                           -end-

