SAS User File for H26FF1 Data  

This file contains information and sample SAS programs to create a permanent
SAS dataset, for users who want to use SAS in processing the MEPS data
provided in this PUF release.

There are two ways to create a permanent SAS dataset, using either the SAS
transport data file (H26FF1.SSP) or the ASCII data file (H26FF1.DAT)    
supplied in this PUF release.  Section A provides a sample SAS program for the
first alternative, which is to convert the SAS transport data file to a
regular SAS dataset, using the SAS PROCedure: XCOPY.  Section B provides a
sample SAS program for the second alternative, which is to read data from the
ASCII data file, using a SAS DATA step with INFILE, INPUT, and LABEL
statements.  Section C explains format-related SAS statements that a user may
optionally use when working with the SAS dataset.  Examples of SAS programs
(DATA step or PROC) are provided in all three sections, primarily for the
benefit of inexperienced users.  Section D contains complete SAS statements
that must be used in the programs described in Sections B and C.

INCLUDED BELOW ARE NOTES APPLICABLE TO USERS OF SAS VERSION 8.

******************************************************************************

The sample SAS programs provided in Sections A and B show how to create a
permanent SAS dataset from the data files provided in this PUF release.

A.     A Sample SAS Program for Converting the SAS Transport File to a
Permanent SAS Dataset 

The SAS PROCedure XCOPY will read a SAS transport data file and convert the
data to regular SAS format, storing the output in a permanent SAS dataset. 
This permanent SAS dataset can then be used for all future processing and
analyses.

Below is a sample PC-SAS program that can be used to convert the SAS transport
file to a permanent PC SAS dataset (in a Windows environment, with SAS V6.12). 
 
     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     FILENAME IN1 'C:\MEPS\H26FF1.SSP';  

     PROC XCOPY IN=IN1 OUT=PUFLIB IMPORT;
     RUN;

If the user wants a list of variables and a few sample records in the
permanent SAS dataset, following are the SAS statements to accomplish these.

     PROC CONTENTS DATA=PUFLIB.H26FF1;  
     TITLE "List of Variables in MEPS H26FF1 SAS Dataset";  
     RUN;

     PROC PRINT DATA=PUFLIB.H26FF1 (OBS=20);  
     TITLE "First 20 Observations in MEPS H26FF1 SAS Dataset";  
     RUN;

The LIBNAME statement tells SAS the location (directory name) to store the
permanent SAS dataset which is output by PROC XCOPY.  The FILENAME statement
tells SAS the location (complete directory and file name) of the input SAS
transport data file. 

NOTES:

     1)  The names used in the LIBNAME and FILENAME statements shown
     above (i.e., PUFLIB, IN1) are arbitrary; they are only temporary
     aliases.

     2)  The directory and file names used in the LIBNAME and FILENAME
     statements shown above are Windows syntax and may need to be
     modified for other operating systems such as UNIX, MAC/OS, VMS, or
     OS/2.

     3)  H26FF1 is the internal SAS dataset name (also the PC file name,  
     without the extension) prior to the creation of the SAS transport data
     file.  After running PROC XCOPY, the output SAS dataset assumes the same
     dataset name (or file name).  Hence, in the example above, a file named
     H26FF1.SD2 will be created under the C:\MEPS directory when PROC  
     XCOPY runs successfully.

     4)  The SAS transport file H26FF1.SSP was created from a PC-SAS Version  
     6.12 data file, using PROC COPY.  This file has been tested for use
     with PC-SAS version 6.10 or higher, or with mainframe SAS version
     6.08 or higher.  This file may work with earlier versions of SAS,
     although it has not been tested with those versions. Users who are
     unable to use this SAS Transport file should instead convert the ASCII
     data file H26FF1.DAT to a SAS data set as described in Section B.  

ADDITONAL NOTE TO USERS OF SAS VERSION 8:  One of the following procedures
should be used to avoid a SAS error when using the downloaded SAS Transport
file:

     1) Add V8 to LIBNAME statement - e.g., 

               LIBNAME PUFLIB V8 'C:\MEPS'; 
      OR

     2) Output the SAS data set to a different library than the one which
     contains the downloaded SAS Transport file - e.g.,

               LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
               FILENAME IN1 'C:\DOWNLOAD\H26FF1.SSP';    

               PROC XCOPY IN=IN1 OUT=PUFLIB IMPORT;
               RUN;

B.     A Sample SAS Program for Converting the ASCII Data File to a Permanent
SAS Dataset

The complete SAS statements (INPUT and LABEL) included in Section D are
intended to save time for those users wishing to create a permanent SAS
dataset from the H26FF1.DAT ASCII data  file.  These statements must be used  
in combination with other SAS statements to create the appropriate SAS
program, as shown below.  To use the statements provided in Section D to
create a SAS program, you will need an ASCII text editor.  If you are using an
interactive form of SAS (Windows, UNIX, OS2, etc.), use the editor provided as
part of the SAS software.  

Following is a sample SAS program that will convert the ASCII data file to SAS
format.

     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     FILENAME IN1 'C:\MEPS\H26FF1.DAT';  

     DATA PUFLIB.H26FF1;  
     INFILE IN1 LRECL=370;  
     INPUT .....; * to user: insert the complete INPUT statement that is
provided in Section D;
     LABEL .....; * to user: insert the complete LABEL statement that is
provided in Section D;
     RUN;

Here is an explanation of the SAS statements used in the program above.

LIBNAME statement: This tells SAS the location (directory name) of the
permanent SAS dataset.

FILENAME statement: This tells SAS the location of the input ASCII data file.

DATA statement: This signifies the beginning of a SAS DATA step and specifies
describes the output SAS dataset, referencing the LIBNAME entry (PUFLIB) and
assigning an internal SAS dataset name (H26FF1).  In the example, after the  
successful completion of the DATA step, a PC file named H26FF1.SD2 would have  
been created in the C:\MEPS directory.

INFILE statement: This tells SAS the location (directory and file name) of the
input ASCII data file.  Also provided is the logical record length (370  
bytes), with the default of RECFM=V implied when this parameter is omitted. 
LRECL and RECFM are optional parameters in the INFILE statement.  With regard
to these options, please note the following: the ASCII data file H26FF1.DAT  
contains a 2-byte carriage return/line feed at the end of each record.  When
converting to a PC-SAS file, the LRECL option should be used to specify the
record length to avoid use of a default record length by PC-SAS.  If the
RECFM=V option is used, the LRECL option must be specified as the logical
record length (e.g., 370 for H26FF1.DAT).  If RECFM=F is used, then the    
LRECL value must  be specified as the logical record length plus 2 (372 for  
H26FF1.DAT).  Note that if the RECFM option is omitted, then the default  
option of RECFM=V is automatically used, and LRECL should be specified as the
logical record (370 for H26FF1.DAT).    

INPUT statement: This specifies the input record layout, giving names and the
beginning and ending column positions for data items (which become SAS
variables) in the ASCII data file (H26FF1.DAT).  Variable type (numeric or  
character) is also defined via the INPUT statement.

LABEL statement: This associates descriptive names with the SAS variables.

RUN statement: This tells SAS to execute all commands up to this point.

ADDITONAL NOTE TO USERS OF SAS VERSION 8:  One of the following procedures
should be used to avoid a SAS error when using the downloaded ASCII data file:

     1) Add V8 to LIBNAME statement - e.g., 

               LIBNAME PUFLIB V8 'C:\MEPS'; 
      OR

     2) Output the SAS data set to a different library than the one which
     contains the downloaded ASCII data file - e.g.,

               LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
               FILENAME IN1 'C:\DOWNLOAD\H26FF1.DAT';    

               DATA PUFLIB.H26FF1;  
               INFILE IN1 LRECL=370;  

C.     Optional Format-related SAS Statements

If a user wants to use formats for the SAS variables, a SAS format library
must first be created.  Below is a SAS program that will accomplish this.

     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     
     PROC FORMAT LIBRARY=PUFLIB;
     VALUE .....; * to user: insert the complete set of VALUE statements found
in Section D;
     VALUE .....;
     .......... ;
     RUN;


Below is an example of how to use the SAS formats defined by the PROC FORMAT
procedure.

     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     OPTIONS FMTSEARCH=(PUFLIB); 
   
     PROC FREQ DATA=PUFLIB.H26FF1;  
     TABLES .... / LIST MISSING;
     FORMAT varnam1 fmtnam1.  Varnam2 fmtnam2.  .... ;
     * to user: substitute varnami and fmtnami with actual variable names and
format names;
     *     Insert the FORMAT statement provided in Section D, if you are using
all the variables;
     *     in the TABLES statement;
     TITLE "Frequency Distributions ....";
     RUN; 

Here is an explanation of the SAS statements used above.

LIBNAME statement: This tells SAS the location (directory name) of the SAS
format library.  Please note that SAS datasets (file name extension is 'SD2')
and format libraries (file name extension is 'SC2') can be stored under the
same directory.

OPTIONS FMTSEARCH=...: This specifies the SAS format library.

PROC FORMAT statement: This identifies the SAS procedure that will make SAS
formats according to VALUE statements.  Formats will be stored in a file named
FORMATS.SC2.  Please note that the option 'LIBRARY=...' can be omitted, if the
user does not want to create a permanent SAS format library.  When simply
'PROC FORMAT;' is used, the formats are defined only for the duration of the
batch SAS program or an interactive SAS session.

VALUE statement: This gives a) names to formats; and b) descriptive labels for
individual values, or range of values.  The format names can then be invoked
using a FORMAT statement, if desired.

PROC FREQ statement: This identifies the SAS procedure that will generate
frequency distributions of variables specified in the TABLES statement,
formatted if a FORMAT statement is used.  The input SAS dataset is specified
in the 'DATA=' option.

FORMAT statement: This associates existing formats with variables.  When using
this statement, the formats must have already been created with a PROC FORMAT
procedure. 

RUN statement: This tells SAS to execute all commands up to this point.


NOTES:

     1)  Use of formats is entirely optional, and depends on the type
     of analyses that you are doing.  It is recommended that you create
     and use them as appropriate.

     2)  The names used in the LIBNAME and FILENAME statements shown
     above (i.e., PUFLIB, IN1) are arbitrary; they are only temporary
     aliases.

     3)  You only create the permanent SAS data set once.  Additional
     analyses can be run using this permanent dataset.

     4)  The file and directory specifications in the LIBNAME and
     FILENAME statements are Windows syntax and may need to be modified
     for other operating systems such as UNIX, MAC/OS, VMS, or OS/2.


D.  SAS Statements

This section contains SAS INPUT, LABEL, FORMAT and VALUE statements for use in
converting the ASCII H26FF1.DAT file into a SAS data set, and for creating  
SAS formats.

* INPUT STATEMENTS;
INFILE IN LRECL=370;

INPUT @1      DUID      5.0
      @6      PID       3.0
      @9      DUPERSID $8.0
      @17     EVNTIDX  $12.0
      @29     EVENTRN   1.0
      @30     FFEEIDX  $12.0
      @42     MPCDATA   1.0
      @43     OPDATEYR  4.0
      @47     OPDATEMM  2.0
      @49     OPDATEDD  2.0
      @51     REFERDBY  2.0
      @53     SEEDOC    2.0
      @55     MEDPTYPE  2.0
      @57     TIMESPNT  2.0
      @59     VSTCTGRY  2.0
      @61     VSTRELCN  2.0
      @63     PHYSTH    2.0
      @65     OCCUPTH   2.0
      @67     SPEECHTH  2.0
      @69     CHEMOTH   2.0
      @71     RADIATTH  2.0
      @73     KIDNEYD   2.0
      @75     IVTHER    2.0
      @77     DRUGTRT   2.0
      @79     RCVSHOT   2.0
      @81     PSYCHOTH  2.0
      @83     LABTEST   2.0
      @85     SONOGRAM  2.0
      @87     XRAYS     2.0
      @89     MAMMOG    2.0
      @91     MRI       2.0
      @93     EKG       2.0
      @95     EEG       2.0
      @97     RCVVAC    2.0
      @99     ANESTH    2.0
      @101    OTHSVCE   2.0
      @103    SURGPROC  2.0
      @105    SURGNAME  2.0
      @107    MEDPRESC  2.0
      @109    DOCOUTF   2.0
      @111    VAPLACE   1.0
      @112    OPICD1X  $3.0
      @115    OPICD2X  $3.0
      @118    OPICD3X  $3.0
      @121    OPICD4X  $3.0
      @124    OPPRO1X  $2.0
      @126    OPCCC1X  $3.0
      @129    OPCCC2X  $3.0
      @132    OPCCC3X  $3.0
      @135    OPCCC4X  $3.0
      @138    FFOPTYPE  2.0
      @140    FFBEF98   2.0
      @142    FFTOT99   2.0
      @144    OPXP98X   8.2
      @152    OPTC98X   8.2
      @160    OPFSF98X  7.2
      @167    OPFMR98X  8.2
      @175    OPFMD98X  7.2
      @182    OPFPV98X  8.2
      @190    OPFVA98X  7.2
      @197    OPFCH98X  7.2
      @204    OPFOF98X  8.2
      @212    OPFSL98X  7.2
      @219    OPFWC98X  7.2
      @226    OPFOR98X  7.2
      @233    OPFOU98X  7.2
      @240    OPFOT98X  7.2
      @247    OPFXP98X  8.2
      @255    OPFTC98X  8.2
      @263    OPDSF98X  7.2
      @270    OPDMR98X  7.2
      @277    OPDMD98X  7.2
      @284    OPDPV98X  7.2
      @291    OPDVA98X  6.2
      @297    OPDCH98X  6.2
      @303    OPDOF98X  5.2
      @308    OPDSL98X  5.2
      @313    OPDWC98X  7.2
      @320    OPDOR98X  7.2
      @327    OPDOU98X  6.2
      @333    OPDOT98X  6.2
      @339    OPDXP98X  7.2
      @346    OPDTC98X  8.2
      @354    WTDPER98  12.6
      @366    VARPSU98  2.0
      @368    VARSTR98  3.0
;


* FORMAT STATEMENTS;
FORMAT DUID     VALIDID.
       PID      VALIDID.
       DUPERSID $VALIDID.
       EVNTIDX  $VALIDID.
       EVENTRN  EVENTRN.
       FFEEIDX  $VALIDID.
       MPCDATA  MPCDATA.
       OPDATEYR OPDATEYR.
       OPDATEMM OPDATEMM.
       OPDATEDD OPDATEDD.
       REFERDBY REFERDBY.
       SEEDOC   SEEDOC.
       MEDPTYPE MEDPTYPE.
       TIMESPNT TIMESPNT.
       VSTCTGRY VSTCTGRY.
       VSTRELCN VSTRELCN.
       PHYSTH   PHYSTH.
       OCCUPTH  OCCUPTH.
       SPEECHTH SPEECHTH.
       CHEMOTH  CHEMOTH.
       RADIATTH RADIATTH.
       KIDNEYD  KIDNEYD.
       IVTHER   IVTHER.
       DRUGTRT  DRUGTRT.
       RCVSHOT  RCVSHOT.
       PSYCHOTH PSYCHOTH.
       LABTEST  LABTEST.
       SONOGRAM SONOGRAM.
       XRAYS    XRAYS.
       MAMMOG   MAMMOG.
       MRI      MRI.
       EKG      EKG.
       EEG      EEG.
       RCVVAC   RCVVAC.
       ANESTH   ANESTH.
       OTHSVCE  OTHSVCE.
       SURGPROC SURGPROC.
       SURGNAME SURGNAME.
       MEDPRESC MEDPRESC.
       DOCOUTF  DOCOUTF.
       VAPLACE  VAPLACE.
       OPICD1X  $ICD9COD.
       OPICD2X  $ICD9COD.
       OPICD3X  $ICD9COD.
       OPICD4X  $ICD9COD.
       OPPRO1X  $ICD9PRO.
       OPCCC1X  $CCCODEX.
       OPCCC2X  $CCCODEX.
       OPCCC3X  $CCCODEX.
       OPCCC4X  $CCCODEX.
       FFOPTYPE FFOPTYPE.
       FFBEF98  FFBEF.
       FFTOT99  FFTOT.
       OPXP98X  OPXP98X.
       OPTC98X  OPTC98X.
       OPFSF98X OPFSF98X.
       OPFMR98X OPFMR98X.
       OPFMD98X OPFMD98X.
       OPFPV98X OPFPV98X.
       OPFVA98X OPFVA98X.
       OPFCH98X OPFCH98X.
       OPFOF98X OPFOF98X.
       OPFSL98X OPFSL98X.
       OPFWC98X OPFWC98X.
       OPFOR98X OPFOR98X.
       OPFOU98X OPFOU98X.
       OPFOT98X OPFOT98X.
       OPFXP98X OPFXP98X.
       OPFTC98X OPFTC98X.
       OPDSF98X OPDSF98X.
       OPDMR98X OPDMR98X.
       OPDMD98X OPDMD98X.
       OPDPV98X OPDPV98X.
       OPDVA98X OPDVA98X.
       OPDCH98X OPDCH98X.
       OPDOF98X OPDOF98X.
       OPDSL98X OPDSL98X.
       OPDWC98X OPDWC98X.
       OPDOR98X OPDOR98X.
       OPDOU98X OPDOU98X.
       OPDOT98X OPDOT98X.
       OPDXP98X OPDXP98X.
       OPDTC98X OPDTC98X.
       WTDPER98 WTDPER.
       VARPSU98 VARPSU.
       VARSTR98 VARSTR.
;


* LABEL STATEMENTS;
LABEL DUID    ='DWELLING UNIT ID'
      PID     ='PERSON NUMBER'
      DUPERSID='PERSON ID (DUID + PID)'
      EVNTIDX ='EVENT ID'
      EVENTRN ='EVENT ROUND NUMBER'
      FFEEIDX ='FLAT FEE ID'
      MPCDATA ='MPC DATA FLAG'
      OPDATEYR='EVENT DATE - YEAR'
      OPDATEMM='EVENT DATE - MONTH'
      OPDATEDD='EVENT DATE - DAY'
      REFERDBY='THIS VISIT REFERRED BY ANOTHER PHYSICIAN'
      SEEDOC  ='DID P TALK TO MD THIS VISIT/PHONE CALL'
      MEDPTYPE='TYPE OF MED PERSON P TALKED TO ON VST DT'
      TIMESPNT='TIME P SPENT WITH DOCTOR/MEDICAL PERSON'
      VSTCTGRY='BEST CATEGORY FOR CARE P RECV ON VST DT'
      VSTRELCN='THIS VST/PHONE CALL RELATED TO SPEC COND'
      PHYSTH  ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE PHYSICAL THERAPY'
      OCCUPTH ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE OCCUPATIONAL THERA'
      SPEECHTH='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE SPEECH THERAPY'
      CHEMOTH ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE CHEMOTHERAPY'
      RADIATTH='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE RADIATION THERAPY'
      KIDNEYD ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE KIDNEY DIALYSIS'
      IVTHER  ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE IV THERAPY'
      DRUGTRT ='THIS VIS DID P HAVE TRT FOR DRUG OR ALCH'
      RCVSHOT ='THIS VISIT DID P RECEIVE AN ALLERGY SHOT'
      PSYCHOTH='DID P HAVE PSYCHOTHERAPY/COUNSELING'
      LABTEST ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE LAB TEST'
      SONOGRAM='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE SONOGRAM OR ULTRSD'
      XRAYS   ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE XRAYS'
      MAMMOG  ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE A MAMMOGRTAM'
      MRI     ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE AN MRI'
      EKG     ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE AN EKG OR ECG'
      EEG     ='THIS VISIT DID P HAVE AN EEG'
      RCVVAC  ='THIS VISIT DID P RECEIVE A VACCINATION'
      ANESTH  ='DURING THIS VISIT P RECEIVE ANESTHESIA'
      OTHSVCE ='DID P RECEIVE OTH DIAGNOSTIC TESTS/EXAMS'
      SURGPROC='WAS SURG PROC PERFORMED ON P THIS VISIT'
      SURGNAME='SURGICAL PROCEDURE NAME IN CATEGORIES'
      MEDPRESC='ANY MEDICINES PRESCRIBED FOR P DUR VISIT'
      DOCOUTF ='ANY DOC/SURG ALSO SEEN OUTSIDE PROVIDER'
      VAPLACE ='VA FACILITY FLAG'
      OPICD1X ='3 DIGIT ICD-9 CONDITION CODE'
      OPICD2X ='3 DIGIT ICD-9 CONDITION CODE'
      OPICD3X ='3 DIGIT ICD-9 CONDITION CODE'
      OPICD4X ='3 DIGIT ICD-9 CONDITION CODE'
      OPPRO1X ='2 DIGIT ICD-9 PROCEDURE CODE'
      OPCCC1X ='MODIFIED CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION CODE'
      OPCCC2X ='MODIFIED CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION CODE'
      OPCCC3X ='MODIFIED CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION CODE'
      OPCCC4X ='MODIFIED CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION CODE'
      FFOPTYPE='FLAT FEE BUNDLE'
      FFBEF98 ='TOTAL # OF VISITS IN FF BEFORE 1998'
      FFTOT99 ='TOTAL # OF VISITS IN FF AFTER 1998'
      OPXP98X ='TOT EXP FOR EVENT (OPFXP98X + OPDXP98X)'
      OPTC98X ='TOT CHG FOR EVENT (OPFTC98X + OPDTC98X)'
      OPFSF98X='FACILITY AMT PD, FAMILY (IMPUTED)'
      OPFMR98X='FACILITY AMT PD, MEDICARE (IMPUTED)'
      OPFMD98X='FACILITY AMT PD, MEDICAID (IMPUTED)'
      OPFPV98X='FACILITY AMT PD, PRIV INSUR (IMPUTED)'
      OPFVA98X='FACILITY AMT PD, VETERANS (IMPUTED)'
      OPFCH98X='FACILITY AMT PD, CHAMP/CHAMPVA (IMPUTED)'
      OPFOF98X='FACILITY AMT PD, OTH FEDERAL (IMPUTED)'
      OPFSL98X='FACILITY AMT PD, STATE/LOC GOV (IMPUTED)'
      OPFWC98X='FACILITY AMT PD, WORKERS COMP (IMPUTED)'
      OPFOR98X='FACILITY AMT PD, OTH PRIV (IMPUTED)'
      OPFOU98X='FACILITY AMT PD, OTH PUB (IMPUTED)'
      OPFOT98X='FACILITY AMT PD, OTH INSUR (IMPUTED)'
      OPFXP98X='FACILITY SUM PAYMENTS OPFSF98X-OPFOT98X'
      OPFTC98X='TOTAL FACILITY CHARGE (IMPUTED)'
      OPDSF98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, FAMILY (IMPUTED)'
      OPDMR98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, MEDICARE (IMPUTED)'
      OPDMD98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, MEDICAID (IMPUTED)'
      OPDPV98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID,PRIVATE INSURNCE(IMP)'
      OPDVA98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, VETERANS (IMPUTED)'
      OPDCH98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, CHAMP/CHAMPVA (IMP)'
      OPDOF98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, OTHER FEDERAL (IMP)'
      OPDSL98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID,STATE/LOCAL GOVT(IMP)'
      OPDWC98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, WORKER S COMP (IMP)'
      OPDOR98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, OTHER PRIVATE (IMP)'
      OPDOU98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID, OTHER PUBLIC (IMP)'
      OPDOT98X='DOCTOR AMOUNT PAID,OTHER INSURANCE (IMP)'
      OPDXP98X='DOCTOR SUM PAYMENTS OPDSF98X-OPDOT98X'
      OPDTC98X='TOTAL DOCTOR CHARGE (IMPUTED)'
      WTDPER98='POVERTY/MORTALITY ADJ PERS LEVL WGT 98'
      VARPSU98='VARIANCE ESTIMATION PSU,1998'
      VARSTR98='VARIANCE ESTIMATION STRATUM,1998'
;


* VALUE STATEMENTS;
VALUE ANESTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE $CCCODEX  
  '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  '-2' = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  '-3' = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  '-7' = '-7 REFUSED'
  '-8' = '-8 DK'
  '-9' = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  '001' - '260' = '001-260'
  ;
VALUE CHEMOTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE DOCOUTF  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  ;
VALUE DRUGTRT  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE EEG  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE EKG  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE EVENTRN  
  1 = '1 ROUND 1'
  2 = '2 ROUND 2'
  3 = '3 ROUND 3'
  4 = '4 ROUND 4'
  5 = '5 ROUND 5'
  ;
VALUE FFBEF  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  0 = '0'
  1 - 9 = '1-9'
  ;
VALUE FFOPTYPE  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 FLAT FEE STEM'
  2 = '2 FLAT FEE LEAF'
  ;
VALUE FFTOT  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  0 = '0'
  1 - 6 = '1-6'
  ;
VALUE $ICD9COD  
  '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  '-2' = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  '-3' = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  '-7' = '-7 REFUSED'
  '-8' = '-8 DK'
  '-9' = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  '001' - '139' = '001-139'
  '140' - '239' = '140-239'
  '240' - '279' = '240-279'
  '280' - '289' = '280-289'
  '290' - '319' = '290-319'
  '320' - '389' = '320-389'
  '390' - '459' = '390-459'
  '460' - '519' = '460-519'
  '520' - '579' = '520-579'
  '580' - '629' = '580-629'
  '630' - '677' = '630-677'
  '680' - '709' = '680-709'
  '710' - '739' = '710-739'
  '740' - '759' = '740-759'
  '760' - '779' = '760-779'
  '780' - '799' = '780-799'
  '800' - '999' = '800-999'
  'V00' - 'V99' = 'V00-V99'
  ;
VALUE $ICD9PRO  
  '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  '-2' = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  '-3' = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  '-7' = '-7 REFUSED'
  '-8' = '-8 DK'
  '-9' = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  '01' - '05' = '01-05'
  '06' - '07' = '06-07'
  '08' - '16' = '08-16'
  '18' - '20' = '18-20'
  '21' - '29' = '21-29'
  '30' - '34' = '30-34'
  '35' - '39' = '35-39'
  '40' - '41' = '40-41'
  '42' - '54' = '42-54'
  '55' - '59' = '55-59'
  '60' - '64' = '60-64'
  '65' - '71' = '65-71'
  '72' - '75' = '72-75'
  '76' - '84' = '76-84'
  '85' - '86' = '85-86'
  '87' - '99' = '87-99'
  ;
VALUE IVTHER  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE KIDNEYD  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE LABTEST  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE MAMMOG  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE MEDPRESC  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  ;
VALUE MEDPTYPE  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 CHIROPRACTOR'
  2 = '2 DENTIST/DENTAL CARE PERSON'
  3 = '3 MIDWIFE'
  4 = '4 NURSE/NURSE PRACTITIONER'
  5 = '5 OPTOMETRIST'
  6 = '6 PODIATRIST'
  7 = "7 PHYSICIAN'S ASSISTANT"
  8 = '8 PHYSICAL THERAPIST'
  9 = '9 OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST'
  10 = '10 PSYCHOLOGIST'
  11 = '11 SOCIAL WORKER'
  12 = '12 TECHNICIAN'
  91 = '91 OTHER'
  ;
VALUE MPCDATA  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 HAS MPC DATA'
  2 = '2 NO MPC DATA'
  ;
VALUE MRI  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE OCCUPTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE OPDATEDD  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 - 31 = '1 - 31'
  ;
VALUE OPDATEMM  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 - 12 = '1 - 12'
  ;
VALUE OPDATEYR  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1998 = '1998'
  ;
VALUE OPDCH98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  6.64 - 14.12 = '$6.64 - $14.12'
  14.12 < - 21.94 = '$14.13 - $21.94'
  21.94 < - 48.595 = '$21.95 - $48.60'
  48.595 < - 631.84 = '$48.61 - $631.84'
  ;
VALUE OPDMD98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1.63 - 16.62 = '$1.63 - $16.62'
  16.62 < - 31.43 = '$16.63 - $31.43'
  31.43 < - 101.89 = '$31.44 - $101.89'
  101.89 < - 1467.55 = '$101.90 - $1467.55'
  ;
VALUE OPDMR98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  6 - 30.49 = '$6.00 - $30.49'
  30.49 < - 74.695 = '$30.50 - $74.70'
  74.695 < - 203.8 = '$74.71 - $203.80'
  203.8 < - 3433.55 = '$203.81 - $3433.55'
  ;
VALUE OPDOF98X  
  0 = '0'
  27 - 82.25 = '$27.00 - $82.25'
  ;
VALUE OPDOR98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1.74 - 22 = '$1.74 - $22.00'
  22 < - 72.145 = '$22.01 - $72.15'
  72.145 < - 234.54 = '$72.16 - $234.54'
  234.54 < - 5057.88 = '$234.55 - $5057.88'
  ;
VALUE OPDOT98X  
  0 = '0'
  26 - 914 = '$26.00 - $914.00'
  ;
VALUE OPDOU98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  8.18 - 21.5 = '$8.18 - $21.50'
  21.5 < - 28 = '$21.51 - $28.00'
  28 < - 85.48 = '$28.01 - $85.48'
  85.48 < - 209.27 = '$85.49 - $209.27'
  ;
VALUE OPDPV98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  2.12 - 33.51 = '$2.12 - $33.51'
  33.51 < - 100.59 = '$33.52 - $100.59'
  100.59 < - 385 = '$100.60 - $385.00'
  385 < - 7516.98 = '$385.01 - $7516.98'
  ;
VALUE OPDSF98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  0.36 - 10 = '$0.36 - $10.00'
  10 < - 30 = '$10.01 - $30.00'
  30 < - 105 = '$30.01 - $105.00'
  105 < - 2039.96 = '$105.01 - $2039.96'
  ;
VALUE OPDSL98X  
  0 = '0'
  15 - 91.75 = '$15.00 - $91.75'
  ;
VALUE OPDTC98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  6 - 71 = '$6.00 - $71.00'
  71 < - 196 = '$71.01 - $196.00'
  196 < - 750 = '$196.01 - $750.00'
  750 < - 12456 = '$750.01 - $12456.00'
  ;
VALUE OPDVA98X  
  0 = '0'
  11.66 - 766.56 = '$11.66 - $766.56'
  ;
VALUE OPDWC98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  17 - 196.43 = '$17.00 - $196.43'
  196.43 < - 726 = '$196.44 - $726.00'
  726 < - 1200 = '$726.01 - $1200.00'
  1200 < - 3689 = '$1200.01 - $3689.00'
  ;
VALUE OPDXP98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  4.14 - 38 = '$4.14 - $38.00'
  38 < - 118 = '$38.01 - $118.00'
  118 < - 380.16 = '$118.01 - $380.16'
  380.16 < - 7516.98 = '$380.17 - $7516.98'
  ;
VALUE OPFCH98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  4.26 - 42.75 = '$4.26 - $42.75'
  42.75 < - 113 = '$42.76 - $113.00'
  113 < - 462.4 = '$113.01 - $462.40'
  462.4 < - 4378.71 = '$462.41 - $4378.71'
  ;
VALUE OPFMD98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  0.58 - 25.935 = '$0.58 - $25.94'
  25.935 < - 79.85 = '$25.95 - $79.85'
  79.85 < - 206.23 = '$79.86 - $206.23'
  206.23 < - 5748.75 = '$206.24 - $5748.75'
  ;
VALUE OPFMR98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1 - 22.94 = '$1.00 - $22.94'
  22.94 < - 77.815 = '$22.95 - $77.82'
  77.815 < - 166.68 = '$77.83 - $166.68'
  166.68 < - 12294.75 = '$166.69 - $12294.75'
  ;
VALUE OPFOF98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1.75 - 65 = '$1.75 - $65.00'
  65 < - 96.8 = '$65.01 - $96.80'
  96.8 < - 114.5 = '$96.81 - $114.50'
  114.5 < - 12000 = '$114.51 - $12000.00'
  ;
VALUE OPFOR98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  0.98 - 18.02 = '$0.98 - $18.02'
  18.02 < - 59.45 = '$18.03 - $59.45'
  59.45 < - 140 = '$59.46 - $140.00'
  140 < - 8611.72 = '$140.01 - $8611.72'
  ;
VALUE OPFOT98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1.91 - 15.565 = '$1.91 - $15.57'
  15.565 < - 86.16 = '$15.58 - $86.16'
  86.16 < - 211.625 = '$86.17 - $211.63'
  211.625 < - 3919.15 = '$211.64 - $3919.15'
  ;
VALUE OPFOU98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1.57 - 17.77 = '$1.57 - $17.77'
  17.77 < - 24 = '$17.78 - $24.00'
  24 < - 75.81 = '$24.01 - $75.81'
  75.81 < - 2927.27 = '$75.82 - $2927.27'
  ;
VALUE OPFPV98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  0.18 - 36.545 = '$0.18 - $36.55'
  36.545 < - 90.25 = '$36.56 - $90.25'
  90.25 < - 357.14 = '$90.26 - $357.14'
  357.14 < - 15096.75 = '$357.15 - $15096.75'
  ;
VALUE OPFSF98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  0.11 - 10 = '$0.11 - $10.00'
  10 < - 20 = '$10.01 - $20.00'
  20 < - 50 = '$20.01 - $50.00'
  50 < - 5000 = '$50.01 - $5000.00'
  ;
VALUE OPFSL98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  5.8 - 13.73 = '$5.80 - $13.73'
  13.73 < - 44.955 = '$13.74 - $44.96'
  44.955 < - 127.79 = '$44.97 - $127.79'
  127.79 < - 1221.25 = '$127.80 - $1221.25'
  ;
VALUE OPFTC98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  3 - 79 = '$3.00 - $79.00'
  79 < - 160 = '$79.01 - $160.00'
  160 < - 485 = '$160.01 - $485.00'
  485 < - 88461 = '$485.01 - $88461.00'
  ;
VALUE OPFVA98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  0.5 - 34.96 = '$0.50 - $34.96'
  34.96 < - 70.5 = '$34.97 - $70.50'
  70.5 < - 114.5 = '$70.51 - $114.50'
  114.5 < - 3237.85 = '$114.51 - $3237.85'
  ;
VALUE OPFWC98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  4.89 - 67.64 = '$4.89 - $67.64'
  67.64 < - 94.61 = '$67.65 - $94.61'
  94.61 < - 258 = '$94.62 - $258.00'
  258 < - 8636.03 = '$258.01 - $8636.03'
  ;
VALUE OPFXP98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1 - 38.3 = '$1.00 - $38.30'
  38.3 < - 96.74 = '$38.31 - $96.74'
  96.74 < - 287.1 = '$96.75 - $287.10'
  287.1 < - 15096.75 = '$287.11 - $15096.75'
  ;
VALUE OPTC98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  3.5 - 90 = '$3.50 - $90.00'
  90 < - 189 = '$90.01 - $189.00'
  189 < - 681.25 = '$189.01 - $681.25'
  681.25 < - 88751 = '$681.26 - $88751.00'
  ;
VALUE OPXP98X  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  0 = '0'
  1 - 46.55 = '$1.00 - $46.55'
  46.55 < - 117 = '$46.56 - $117.00'
  117 < - 397.14 = '$117.01 - $397.14'
  397.14 < - 15096.75 = '$397.15 - $15096.75'
  ;
VALUE OTHSVCE  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE PHYSTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE PSYCHOTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE RADIATTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE RCVSHOT  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE RCVVAC  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE REFERDBY  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  ;
VALUE SEEDOC  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  ;
VALUE SONOGRAM  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE SPEECHTH  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO TREATMENT RECEIVED'
  ;
VALUE SURGNAME  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY'
  2 = '2 CATARACT SURGERY'
  3 = '3 CLEANING/TREATM WOUND, INFECTION'
  4 = '4 DILATION AND CURETTAGE (D AND C)'
  5 = '5 STITCHES (WOUND SUTURE)'
  6 = '6 TISSUE BIOPSY'
  7 = '7 TONSILLECTOMY'
  8 = '8 ADENOIDECTOMY'
  9 = '9 CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION'
  10 = '10 EAR TUBES (TYMPANOSTOMY TUBES)'
  11 = '11 PACEMAKER INSERTION'
  91 = '91 OTHER SURGICAL PROCEDURE'
  ;
VALUE SURGPROC  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  ;
VALUE TIMESPNT  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 5 MINUTES OR LESS'
  2 = '2 6-10 MINUTES'
  3 = '3 11-15 MINUTES'
  4 = '4 16-25 MINUTES'
  5 = '5 26-40 MINUTES'
  6 = '6 41 MINUTES OR MORE'
  ;
VALUE VALIDID  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  0 = '0'
  0 < - HIGH = 'VALID ID'
  ;
VALUE $VALIDID  
  '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  '-3' = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  '-7' = '-7 REFUSED'
  '-8' = '-8 DK'
  '-9' = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  '0' = '0'
  '0' < - HIGH = 'VALID ID'
  ;
VALUE VAPLACE  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  0 = '0 NO'
  1 = '1 YES'
  ;
VALUE VARPSU  
  1 - 56 = '1 - 56'
  ;
VALUE VARSTR  
  1 - 100 = '1 - 100'
  ;
VALUE VSTCTGRY  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 GENERAL CHECKUP'
  2 = '2 DIAGNOSIS OR TREATMENT'
  3 = '3 EMERGENCY (E.G.,ACCIDENT OR JURY)'
  4 = '4 PSYCHOTHERAPY OR MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELING'
  5 = '5 FOLLOW-UP OR POST-OPERATIVE VISIT'
  6 = '6 IMMUNIZATIONS OR SHOTS'
  7 = '7 VISION EXAM'
  8 = '8 MATERNITY CARE (PRE/POSTNATAL)'
  9 = '9 WELL CHILD EXAM'
  91 = '91 OTHER'
  ;
VALUE VSTRELCN  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  ;
VALUE WTDPER  
  0 = '0'
  0 < - HIGH = '354.030272-75996.577148'
  ;
VALUE XRAYS  
  -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
  -8 = '-8 DK'
  -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
  -3 = '-3 NO DATA IN ROUND'
  -2 = '-2 DETERMINED IN PREVIOUS ROUND'
  -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
  1 = '1 YES'
  2 = '2 NO'
  95 = '95 NO SERVICES RECEIVED'
  ;

* NOTE: FOR THE CONDITION VARIABLES ON THIS FILE;
* (..ICDiX, ..PROiX AND ..CCCiX);
* THE FOLLOWING VALUE STATEMENTS CAN BE USED TO CONSTRUCT;
* FORMATS WHICH PROVIDE A LABEL FOR EACH VALUE;
 
   VALUE $I9CONXB  
    '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    '-8' = '-8 DK'
    '002' = '002 TYPHOID/PARATYPHOID FEV*'
    '003' = '003 OTH SALMONELLA INFECTION*'
    '004' = '004 SHIGELLOSIS*'
    '005' = '005 OTHER FOOD POISONING*'
    '006' = '006 AMEBIASIS*'
    '007' = '007 OTH PROTOZOAL INTEST DIS*'
    '008' = '008 INTESTINAL INFECTION NEC*'
    '009' = '009 ILL-DEFINED INTEST INF*'
    '011' = '011 PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS*'
    '017' = '017 TUBERCULOSIS NEC*'
    '031' = '031 OTHER MYCOBACTERIAL DIS*'
    '033' = '033 WHOOPING COUGH*'
    '034' = '034 STREP THROAT/SCARLET FEV*'
    '037' = '037 TETANUS'
    '038' = '038 SEPTICEMIA*'
    '040' = '040 OTHER BACTERIAL DISEASES*'
    '041' = '041 BACT INF IN OTH DIS/NOS*'
    '042' = '042 HUMAN IMMUNO VIRUS DIS'
    '045' = '045 ACUTE POLIOMYELITIS*'
    '047' = '047 ENTEROVIRAL MENINGITIS*'
    '050' = '050 SMALLPOX*'
    '052' = '052 CHICKENPOX*'
    '053' = '053 HERPES ZOSTER*'
    '054' = '054 HERPES SIMPLEX*'
    '055' = '055 MEASLES*'
    '057' = '057 OTHER VIRAL EXANTHEMATA*'
    '066' = '066 OTHER ARTHROPOD VIRUS*'
    '070' = '070 VIRAL HEPATITIS*'
    '074' = '074 COXSACKIE VIRAL DISEASE*'
    '075' = '075 INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS'
    '077' = '077 OTH VIRAL CONJUNCTIVITIS*'
    '078' = '078 OTHER VIRAL DISEASE*'
    '079' = '079 VIRAL INF IN OTH DIS/NOS*'
    '082' = '082 TICK-BORNE RICKETTSIOSES*'
    '083' = '083 OTHER RICKETTSIOSES*'
    '084' = '084 MALARIA*'
    '088' = '088 OTH ARTHROPOD-BORNE DIS*'
    '095' = '095 OTH LATE SYMPT SYPHILIS*'
    '097' = '097 OTH & UNSPEC SYPHILIS*'
    '098' = '098 GONOCOCCAL INFECTIONS*'
    '099' = '099 OTHER VENEREAL DISEASE*'
    '101' = "101 VINCENT'S ANGINA"
    '110' = '110 DERMATOPHYTOSIS*'
    '111' = '111 DERMATOMYCOSIS NEC/NOS*'
    '112' = '112 CANDIDIASIS*'
    '114' = '114 COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS*'
    '115' = '115 HISTOPLASMOSIS*'
    '117' = '117 OTHER MYCOSES*'
    '120' = '120 SCHISTOSOMIASIS*'
    '127' = '127 OTH INTEST HELMINTHIASES*'
    '128' = '128 OTH AND UNSPECIFIED HELMINTHIASES*'
    '129' = '129 INTESTIN PARASITISM NOS'
    '130' = '130 TOXOPLASMOSIS*'
    '131' = '131 TRICHOMONIASIS*'
    '132' = '132 PEDICULOSIS AND PHTHIRUS*'
    '133' = '133 ACARIASIS*'
    '134' = '134 OTHER INFESTATION*'
    '135' = '135 SARCOIDOSIS'
    '136' = '136 INF/PARASITE DIS NEC/NOS*'
    '138' = '138 LATE EFFECT ACUTE POLIO'
    '140' = '140 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM LIP*'
    '141' = '141 MALIG NEO TONGUE*'
    '145' = '145 MALIG NEO MOUTH NEC/NOS*'
    '149' = '149 OTH MALIG NEO OROPHARYNX*'
    '150' = '150 MALIGNANT NEO ESOPHAGUS*'
    '151' = '151 MALIGNANT NEO STOMACH*'
    '152' = '152 MALIG NEO SMALL BOWEL*'
    '153' = '153 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM COLON*'
    '154' = '154 MALIG NEO RECTUM/ANUS*'
    '155' = '155 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM LIVER*'
    '156' = '156 MAL NEO GB/EXTRAHEPATIC*'
    '157' = '157 MALIGNANT NEO PANCREAS*'
    '159' = '159 OTH MALIG NEO GI/PERITON*'
    '161' = '161 MALIGNANT NEO LARYNX*'
    '162' = '162 MAL NEO TRACHEA/LUNG*'
    '170' = '170 MAL NEO BONE/ARTIC CART*'
    '171' = '171 MAL NEO SOFT TISSUE*'
    '172' = '172 MALIGNANT MELANOMA SKIN*'
    '173' = '173 OTHER MALIG NEOPL SKIN*'
    '174' = '174 MALIG NEO FEMALE BREAST*'
    '179' = '179 MALIG NEOPL UTERUS NOS'
    '180' = '180 MALIG NEOPL CERVIX UTERI*'
    '183' = '183 MAL NEO UTERINE ADNEXA*'
    '184' = '184 MAL NEO FEM GEN NEC/NOS*'
    '185' = '185 MALIGN NEOPL PROSTATE'
    '186' = '186 MALIGN NEOPL TESTIS*'
    '187' = '187 MAL NEO MALE GENITAL NEC*'
    '188' = '188 MALIGN NEOPL BLADDER*'
    '189' = '189 MAL NEO URINARY NEC/NOS*'
    '190' = '190 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM EYE*'
    '191' = '191 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM BRAIN*'
    '193' = '193 MALIGN NEOPL THYROID'
    '195' = '195 MAL NEO OTH/ILL-DEF SITE*'
    '198' = '198 SEC MALIG NEO OTH SITES*'
    '199' = '199 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM NOS*'
    '201' = "201 HODGKIN'S DISEASE*"
    '202' = '202 OTH MAL NEO LYMPH/HISTIO*'
    '203' = '203 MULTIPLE MYELOMA ET AL*'
    '204' = '204 LYMPHOID LEUKEMIA*'
    '205' = '205 MYELOID LEUKEMIA*'
    '207' = '207 OTHER SPECIFIED LEUKEMIA*'
    '208' = '208 LEUKEMIA-UNSPECIF CELL*'
    '211' = '211 OTH BENIGN NEOPLASM GI*'
    '212' = '212 BEN NEO RESP SYST/THORAX*'
    '214' = '214 LIPOMA*'
    '215' = '215 OTH BEN NEO SOFT TISSUE*'
    '216' = '216 BENIGN NEOPLASM OF SKIN*'
    '217' = '217 BENIGN NEOPLASM BREAST'
    '218' = '218 UTERINE LEIOMYOMA*'
    '219' = '219 OTH BENIGN NEO UTERUS*'
    '220' = '220 BENIGN NEOPLASM OVARY'
    '222' = '222 BENIGN NEO MALE GENITAL*'
    '224' = '224 BENIGN NEOPLASM OF EYE*'
    '225' = '225 BENIGN NEO NERVOUS SYST*'
    '226' = '226 BENIGN NEOPLASM THYROID'
    '227' = '227 BEN NEO OTH ENDOCRINE*'
    '228' = '228 HEMANGIOMA/LYMPHANGIOMA*'
    '229' = '229 BENIGN NEOPLASM NEC/NOS*'
    '233' = '233 CA IN SITU BREAST/GU*'
    '234' = '234 CA IN SITU NEC/NOS*'
    '235' = '235 UNC BEHAV NEO GI/RESP*'
    '236' = '236 UNC BEHAV NEO GU*'
    '237' = '237 UNCER NEO ENDOCRINE/NERV*'
    '238' = '238 UNC BEHAV NEO NEC/NOS*'
    '239' = '239 UNSPECIFIED NEOPLASM*'
    '240' = '240 GOITER, SIMPLE/NOS*'
    '241' = '241 NONTOXIC NODULAR GOITER*'
    '242' = '242 THYROTOXICOSIS*'
    '244' = '244 ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM*'
    '245' = '245 THYROIDITIS*'
    '246' = '246 OTH DISORDERS OF THYROID*'
    '250' = '250 DIABETES MELLITUS*'
    '251' = '251 OTH PANCREATIC DISORDER*'
    '252' = '252 PARATHYROID DISORDER*'
    '253' = '253 PITUITARY/HYPOTHALM DIS*'
    '255' = '255 ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS*'
    '256' = '256 OVARIAN DYSFUNCTION*'
    '257' = '257 TESTICULAR DYSFUNCTION*'
    '259' = '259 OTH ENDORINE DISORDERS*'
    '263' = '263 PROT-CAL MALNUTR NEC/NOS*'
    '266' = '266 B-COMPLEX DEFICIENCIES*'
    '268' = '268 VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY*'
    '269' = '269 OTH NUTRITION DEFICIENCY*'
    '271' = '271 DIS CARBOHYDRATE METABOL*'
    '272' = '272 DIS OF LIPOID METABOLISM*'
    '273' = '273 DIS PLASMA PROTEIN METAB*'
    '274' = '274 GOUT*'
    '275' = '275 DIS MINERAL METABOLISM*'
    '276' = '276 FLUID/ELECTROLYTE DIS*'
    '277' = '277 METABOLISM DIS NEC/NOS*'
    '278' = '278 OBESITY/HYPERALIMENT*'
    '279' = '279 DIS IMMUNE MECHANISM*'
    '280' = '280 IRON DEFICIENCY ANEMIAS*'
    '281' = '281 OTHER DEFICIENCY ANEMIA*'
    '282' = '282 HEREDIT HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA*'
    '285' = '285 ANEMIA NEC/NOS*'
    '286' = '286 COAGULATION DEFECTS*'
    '287' = '287 PURPURA & OTH HEMOR COND*'
    '288' = '288 WBC DISORDERS*'
    '289' = '289 OTHER BLOOD DISEASE*'
    '290' = '290 SENILE/PRESENILE PSYCHOS*'
    '291' = '291 ALCOHOLIC PSYCHOSES*'
    '292' = '292 DRUG PSYCHOSES*'
    '293' = '293 TRANSIENT ORG MENTAL DIS*'
    '294' = '294 OTHER ORGANIC PSYCH COND*'
    '295' = '295 SCHIZOPHRENIC DISORDERS*'
    '296' = '296 AFFECTIVE PSYCHOSES*'
    '297' = '297 PARANOID STATES*'
    '298' = '298 OTH NONORGANIC PSYCHOSES*'
    '299' = '299 PSYCHOSES OF CHILDHOOD*'
    '300' = '300 NEUROTIC DISORDERS*'
    '301' = '301 PERSONALITY DISORDERS*'
    '302' = '302 SEXUAL DISORDERS*'
    '303' = '303 ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE SYNDR*'
    '304' = '304 DRUG DEPENDENCE*'
    '305' = '305 NONDEPENDENT DRUG ABUSE*'
    '306' = '306 PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGIC DIS*'
    '307' = '307 SPECIAL SYMPTOM NEC*'
    '308' = '308 ACUTE REACTION TO STRESS*'
    '309' = '309 ADJUSTMENT REACTION*'
    '310' = '310 NONPSYCHOTIC BRAIN SYND*'
    '311' = '311 DEPRESSIVE DISORDER NEC'
    '312' = '312 CONDUCT DISTURBANCE NEC*'
    '313' = '313 EMOTIONAL DIS CHILD/ADOL*'
    '314' = '314 HYPERKINETIC SYNDROME*'
    '315' = '315 SPECIFIC DEVELOP DELAYS*'
    '317' = '317 MILD MENTAL RETARDATION'
    '319' = '319 MENTAL RETARDATION NOS'
    '320' = '320 BACTERIAL MENINGITIS*'
    '322' = '322 MENINGITIS, UNSPECIFIED*'
    '323' = '323 ENCEPHALOMYELITIS*'
    '331' = '331 CEREBRAL DEGENERATION*'
    '332' = "332 PARKINSON'S DISEASE*"
    '333' = '333 EXTRAPYRAMIDAL DIS NEC*'
    '334' = '334 SPINOCEREBELLAR DISEASE*'
    '335' = '335 ANT HORN CELL DISEASE*'
    '336' = '336 SPINAL CORD DISEASE NEC*'
    '337' = '337 AUTONOMIC NERVE DISORDER*'
    '340' = '340 MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS'
    '341' = '341 OTHER CNS DEMYELINATION*'
    '342' = '342 HEMIPLEGIA*'
    '343' = '343 INFANTILE CEREBRAL PALSY*'
    '344' = '344 OTH PARALYTIC SYNDROMES*'
    '345' = '345 EPILEPSY*'
    '346' = '346 MIGRAINE*'
    '347' = '347 CATAPLEXY AND NARCOLEPSY'
    '348' = '348 OTHER BRAIN CONDITIONS*'
    '349' = '349 CNS DISORDER NEC/NOS*'
    '350' = '350 TRIGEMINAL NERV DISORDER*'
    '351' = '351 FACIAL NERVE DISORDERS*'
    '352' = '352 DISORDER CRAN NERVE NEC*'
    '353' = '353 NERVE ROOT/PLEXUS DIS*'
    '354' = '354 MONONEURITIS UPPER LIMB*'
    '355' = '355 MONONEURITIS LEG*'
    '356' = '356 HERED PERIPH NEUROPATHY*'
    '357' = '357 INFLAM/TOXIC NEUROPATHY*'
    '358' = '358 MYONEURAL DISORDERS*'
    '359' = '359 MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES*'
    '360' = '360 DISORDERS OF THE GLOBE*'
    '361' = '361 RETINAL DETACHMENT*'
    '362' = '362 RETINAL DISORDERS NEC*'
    '363' = '363 CHOROIDAL DISORDERS*'
    '364' = '364 IRIS/CILIARY BODY DIS*'
    '365' = '365 GLAUCOMA*'
    '366' = '366 CATARACT*'
    '367' = '367 DISORDERS OF REFRACTION*'
    '368' = '368 VISUAL DISTURBANCES*'
    '369' = '369 BLINDNESS AND LOW VISION*'
    '370' = '370 KERATITIS*'
    '371' = '371 CORNEAL OPACITY/DISORDER*'
    '372' = '372 DISORDERS OF CONJUNCTIVA*'
    '373' = '373 INFLAMMATION OF EYELIDS*'
    '374' = '374 DISORDERS OF EYELIDS NEC*'
    '375' = '375 LACRIMAL SYSTEM DISORDER*'
    '376' = '376 DISORDERS OF THE ORBIT*'
    '377' = '377 DISORDERS OF OPTIC NERVE*'
    '378' = '378 STRABISMUS*'
    '379' = '379 EYE DISORDERS NEC*'
    '380' = '380 DISORDER OF EXTERNAL EAR*'
    '381' = '381 NONSUPPUR OTITIS MEDIA*'
    '382' = '382 OTITIS MEDIA, SUPPUR/NOS*'
    '383' = '383 MASTOIDITIS ET AL*'
    '384' = '384 DISORD TYMPANIC MEMB NEC*'
    '385' = '385 DIS MID EAR/MASTOID NEC*'
    '386' = '386 VERTIGINOUS SYNDROMES*'
    '387' = '387 OTOSCLEROSIS*'
    '388' = '388 DISORDERS OF EAR NEC*'
    '389' = '389 HEARING LOSS*'
    '390' = '390 RHEUM FEV W/O HRT INVOLV'
    '391' = '391 RHEUM FEV W HEART INVOLV*'
    '394' = '394 DISEASES OF MITRAL VALVE*'
    '398' = '398 OTH RHEUMATIC HEART DIS*'
    '401' = '401 ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION*'
    '402' = '402 HYPERTENSIVE HEART DIS*'
    '410' = '410 ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCT*'
    '411' = '411 OTH AC ISCHEMIC HRT DIS*'
    '412' = '412 OLD MYOCARDIAL INFARCT'
    '413' = '413 ANGINA PECTORIS*'
    '414' = '414 OTH CHR ISCHEMIC HRT DIS*'
    '415' = '415 ACUTE PULMONARY HRT DIS*'
    '416' = '416 CHR PULMONARY HEART DIS*'
    '423' = '423 OTH PERICARDIAL DISEASE*'
    '424' = '424 OTH ENDOCARDIAL DISEASE*'
    '425' = '425 CARDIOMYOPATHY*'
    '426' = '426 CONDUCTION DISORDERS*'
    '427' = '427 CARDIAC DYSRHYTHMIAS*'
    '428' = '428 HEART FAILURE*'
    '429' = '429 ILL-DEFINED HEART DIS*'
    '430' = '430 SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE'
    '431' = '431 INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE'
    '432' = '432 INTRACRANIAL HEM NEC/NOS*'
    '433' = '433 PRECEREBRAL OCCLUSION*'
    '434' = '434 CEREBRAL ARTERY OCCLUS*'
    '435' = '435 TRANSIENT CEREB ISCHEMIA*'
    '436' = '436 CVA'
    '437' = '437 OTH CEREBROVASC DISEASE*'
    '438' = '438 LATE EFF CEREBROVASC DIS*'
    '440' = '440 ATHEROSCLEROSIS*'
    '441' = '441 AORTIC ANEURYSM*'
    '442' = '442 OTHER ANEURYSM*'
    '443' = '443 OTH PERIPH VASCULAR DIS*'
    '444' = '444 ARTERIAL EMBOLISM*'
    '446' = '446 POLYARTERIT NODOSA ET AL*'
    '447' = '447 OTHER ARTERIAL DISEASE*'
    '448' = '448 DISEASE OF CAPILLARIES*'
    '451' = '451 THROMBOPHLEBITIS*'
    '453' = '453 OTH VENOUS THROMBOSIS*'
    '454' = '454 VARICOSE VEINS, LEG*'
    '455' = '455 HEMORRHOIDS*'
    '456' = '456 VARICOSE VEINS NEC*'
    '457' = '457 NONINFECT LYMPHATIC DIS*'
    '458' = '458 HYPOTENSION NEC'
    '459' = '459 OTH CIRCULATORY DISEASE*'
    '460' = '460 ACUTE NASOPHARYNGITIS'
    '461' = '461 ACUTE SINUSITIS*'
    '462' = '462 ACUTE PHARYNGITIS'
    '463' = '463 ACUTE TONSILLITIS'
    '464' = '464 AC LARYNGITIS/TRACHEITIS*'
    '465' = '465 AC URI MULT SITES/NOS*'
    '466' = '466 AC BRONCHITIS/BRONCHIOL*'
    '470' = '470 DEVIATED NASAL SEPTUM'
    '471' = '471 NASAL POLYPS*'
    '472' = '472 CHR PHARYNG/NASOPHARYNG*'
    '473' = '473 CHRONIC SINUSITIS*'
    '474' = '474 CHR T & A DIS*'
    '475' = '475 PERITONSILLAR ABSCESS'
    '477' = '477 ALLERGIC RHINITIS*'
    '478' = '478 OTH UPPR RESPIRATORY DIS*'
    '480' = '480 VIRAL PNEUMONIA*'
    '482' = '482 OTH BACTERIAL PNEUMONIA*'
    '485' = '485 BRONCHOPNEUMONIA ORG NOS'
    '486' = '486 PNEUMONIA, ORGANISM NOS'
    '487' = '487 INFLUENZA*'
    '490' = '490 BRONCHITIS NOS'
    '491' = '491 CHRONIC BRONCHITIS*'
    '492' = '492 EMPHYSEMA*'
    '493' = '493 ASTHMA*'
    '494' = '494 BRONCHIECTASIS*'
    '496' = '496 CHR AIRWAY OBSTRUCT NEC'
    '500' = "500 COAL WORKERS' PNEUMOCON"
    '501' = '501 ASBESTOSIS'
    '502' = '502 SILICA PNEUMOCON NEC'
    '505' = '505 PNEUMOCONIOSIS NOS'
    '507' = '507 SOLID/LIQ PNEUMONITIS*'
    '510' = '510 EMPYEMA*'
    '511' = '511 PLEURISY*'
    '512' = '512 PNEUMOTHORAX*'
    '514' = '514 PULM CONGEST/HYPOSTASIS'
    '515' = '515 POSTINFLAM PULM FIBROSIS'
    '518' = '518 OTHER LUNG DISEASES*'
    '519' = '519 OTH RESP SYSTEM DISEASES*'
    '520' = '520 TOOTH DEVELOP/ERUPT DIS*'
    '521' = '521 HARD TISSUE DIS OF TEETH*'
    '522' = '522 PULP & PERIAPICAL DIS*'
    '523' = '523 GINGIVAL/PERIODONTAL DIS*'
    '524' = '524 DENTOFACIAL ANOMALIES*'
    '525' = '525 OTHER DENTAL DISORDER*'
    '526' = '526 JAW DISEASES*'
    '527' = '527 SALIVARY GLAND DISEASES*'
    '528' = '528 ORAL SOFT TISSUE DISEASE*'
    '529' = '529 TONGUE DISORDERS*'
    '530' = '530 DISEASES OF ESOPHAGUS*'
    '531' = '531 GASTRIC ULCER*'
    '532' = '532 DUODENAL ULCER*'
    '533' = '533 PEPTIC ULCER, SITE NOS*'
    '535' = '535 GASTRITIS AND DUODENITIS*'
    '536' = '536 STOMACH FUNCTION DISORD*'
    '537' = '537 OTH GASTRODUODENAL DIS*'
    '540' = '540 ACUTE APPENDICITIS*'
    '541' = '541 APPENDICITIS NOS'
    '543' = '543 OTH DISEASES OF APPENDIX*'
    '550' = '550 INGUINAL HERNIA*'
    '552' = '552 OTH ABDOM HERNIA W OBSTR*'
    '553' = '553 OTHER ABDOMINAL HERNIA*'
    '555' = '555 REGIONAL ENTERITIS*'
    '556' = '556 IDIOPATHIC PROCTOCOLITIS*'
    '557' = '557 VASC INSUFF INTESTINE*'
    '558' = '558 OTH NONINF GASTROENTERIT*'
    '560' = '560 INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION*'
    '562' = '562 DIVERTICULA OF INTESTINE*'
    '564' = '564 FUNCT DIGESTIVE DIS NEC*'
    '565' = '565 ANAL FISSURE & FISTULA*'
    '566' = '566 ANAL & RECTAL ABSCESS'
    '567' = '567 PERITONITIS*'
    '568' = '568 OTH PERITONEAL DISORDERS*'
    '569' = '569 OTH INTESTINAL DISORDERS*'
    '571' = '571 CHR LIVER DIS/CIRRHOSIS*'
    '573' = '573 OTH LIVER DISORDERS*'
    '574' = '574 CHOLELITHIASIS*'
    '575' = '575 OTH GALLBLADDER DISORDER*'
    '576' = '576 OTH DIS OF BILIARY TRACT*'
    '577' = '577 DISEASES OF PANCREAS*'
    '578' = '578 GASTROINTESTINAL HEMORR*'
    '579' = '579 INTESTINAL MALABSORPTION*'
    '581' = '581 NEPHROTIC SYNDROME*'
    '583' = '583 NEPHRITIS NOS*'
    '584' = '584 ACUTE RENAL FAILURE*'
    '585' = '585 CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE'
    '586' = '586 RENAL FAILURE NOS'
    '587' = '587 RENAL SCLEROSIS NOS'
    '588' = '588 IMPAIRED RENAL FUNCTION*'
    '590' = '590 KIDNEY INFECTION*'
    '592' = '592 RENAL/URETERAL CALCULUS*'
    '593' = '593 OTH RENAL & URETERAL DIS*'
    '594' = '594 LOWER URIN TRACT CALCUL*'
    '595' = '595 CYSTITIS*'
    '596' = '596 OTHER BLADDER DISORDERS*'
    '597' = '597 URETHRITIS/URETHRAL SYND*'
    '598' = '598 URETHRAL STRICTURE*'
    '599' = '599 OTH URINARY TRACT DISOR*'
    '600' = '600 HYPERPLASIA OF PROSTATE*'
    '601' = '601 PROSTATIC INFLAMMATION*'
    '602' = '602 OTH PROSTATIC DISORDERS*'
    '603' = '603 HYDROCELE*'
    '604' = '604 ORCHITIS & EPIDIDYMITIS*'
    '606' = '606 MALE INFERTILITY*'
    '607' = '607 DISORDERS OF PENIS*'
    '608' = '608 MALE GENITAL DIS NEC*'
    '610' = '610 BENIGN MAMMARY DYSPLASIA*'
    '611' = '611 OTHER BREAST DISORDERS*'
    '614' = '614 FEMALE PELVIC INFLAM DIS*'
    '615' = '615 UTERINE INFLAMMATORY DIS*'
    '616' = '616 OTH FEMALE GEN INFLAM*'
    '617' = '617 ENDOMETRIOSIS*'
    '618' = '618 GENITAL PROLAPSE*'
    '620' = '620 NONINFLAM DIS OVAR/ADNEX*'
    '621' = '621 DISORDERS OF UTERUS NEC*'
    '622' = '622 NONINFLAMM DIS CERVIX*'
    '623' = '623 NONINFLAMM DIS VAGINA*'
    '624' = '624 NONINFLAMM DIS VULVA*'
    '625' = '625 FEMALE GENITAL SYMPTOMS*'
    '626' = '626 DISORDER OF MENSTRUATION*'
    '627' = '627 MENOPAUSAL DISORDERS*'
    '628' = '628 FEMALE INFERTILITY*'
    '629' = '629 OTH FEMALE GENITAL DIS*'
    '633' = '633 ECTOPIC PREGNANCY*'
    '634' = '634 SPONTANEOUS ABORTION*'
    '637' = '637 UNSPECIFIED ABORTION*'
    '639' = '639 COMPL FOLLOWING ABORTION*'
    '640' = '640 HEMORRHAGE IN EARLY PREG*'
    '641' = '641 ANTEPART HEM & PLAC PREV*'
    '642' = '642 HYPERTENSION COMPL PREG*'
    '643' = '643 EXCESS VOMITING IN PREG*'
    '644' = '644 EARLY/THREATENED LABOR*'
    '646' = '646 OTHER COMPL OF PREGNANCY*'
    '648' = '648 OTH CURRENT COND IN PREG*'
    '650' = '650 NORMAL DELIVERY'
    '656' = '656 OTH FETAL PROB AFF MOTH*'
    '658' = '658 OTH AMNIOTIC CAVITY PROB*'
    '665' = '665 OTHER OBSTETRICAL TRAUMA*'
    '666' = '666 POSTPARTUM HEMORRHAGE*'
    '669' = '669 OTH COMPL LABOR/DELIVERY*'
    '674' = '674 PUERPERAL COMPL NEC/NOS*'
    '676' = '676 OTH BREAST/LACT DIS PREG*'
    '680' = '680 CARBUNCLE AND FURUNCLE*'
    '681' = '681 CELLULITIS, FINGER/TOE*'
    '682' = '682 OTHER CELLULITIS/ABSCESS*'
    '683' = '683 ACUTE LYMPHADENITIS'
    '684' = '684 IMPETIGO'
    '685' = '685 PILONIDAL CYST*'
    '686' = '686 OTH LOCAL SKIN INFECTION*'
    '690' = '690 ERYTHEMATOSQUAMOUS DERM*'
    '691' = '691 ATOPIC DERMATITIS*'
    '692' = '692 CONTACT DERMATITIS*'
    '693' = '693 DERMAT D/T INTERN AGENT*'
    '694' = '694 BULLOUS DERMATOSES*'
    '695' = '695 ERYTHEMATOUS CONDITIONS*'
    '696' = '696 PSORIASIS/LIKE DISORDERS*'
    '697' = '697 LICHEN*'
    '698' = '698 PRURITUS & LIKE COND*'
    '700' = '700 CORNS AND CALLOSITIES'
    '701' = '701 OTH SKIN HYPERTRO/ATROPH*'
    '702' = '702 OTHER DERMATOSES*'
    '703' = '703 DISEASES OF NAIL*'
    '704' = '704 HAIR & FOLLICLE DISEASE*'
    '705' = '705 DISORDERS OF SWEAT GLAND*'
    '706' = '706 SEBACEOUS GLAND DISEASE*'
    '707' = '707 CHRONIC ULCER OF SKIN*'
    '708' = '708 URTICARIA*'
    '709' = '709 OTHER SKIN DISORDERS*'
    '710' = '710 DIFF CONNECTIVE TISS DIS*'
    '711' = '711 ARTHROPATHY W INFECTION*'
    '712' = '712 CRYSTAL ARTHROPATHIES*'
    '713' = '713 ARTHROPATH IN OTHER DIS*'
    '714' = '714 OTH INFLAMM POLYARTHROP*'
    '715' = '715 OSTEOARTHROSIS ET AL*'
    '716' = '716 ARTHROPATHIES NEC/NOS*'
    '717' = '717 INTERNAL DERANGEMNT KNEE*'
    '718' = '718 OTHER JOINT DERANGEMENT*'
    '719' = '719 JOINT DISORDER NEC & NOS*'
    '720' = '720 INFLAM SPONDYLOPATHIES*'
    '721' = '721 SPONDYLOSIS ET AL*'
    '722' = '722 INTERVERTEBRAL DISC DIS*'
    '723' = '723 OTHER CERVICAL SPINE DIS*'
    '724' = '724 BACK DISORDER NEC & NOS*'
    '725' = '725 POLYMYALGIA RHEUMATICA'
    '726' = '726 PERIPH ENTHESOPATHIES*'
    '727' = '727 OTH DIS SYNOV/TEND/BURSA*'
    '728' = '728 DIS OF MUSCLE/LIG/FASCIA*'
    '729' = '729 OTHER SOFT TISSUE DIS*'
    '730' = '730 OSTEOMYELITIS*'
    '731' = '731 OSTEITIS DEFORMANS*'
    '732' = '732 OSTEOCHONDROPATHIES*'
    '733' = '733 OTH BONE & CARTILAGE DIS*'
    '734' = '734 FLAT FOOT'
    '735' = '735 ACQ DEFORMITIES OF TOE*'
    '736' = '736 OTH ACQ LIMB DEFORMITIES*'
    '737' = '737 CURVATURE OF SPINE*'
    '738' = '738 OTHER ACQUIRED DEFORMITY*'
    '739' = '739 SOMATIC DYSFUNCTION*'
    '740' = '740 ANENCEPHALUS/SIMIL ANOM*'
    '741' = '741 SPINA BIFIDA*'
    '742' = '742 OTH NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOM*'
    '743' = '743 CONGENITAL EYE ANOMALY*'
    '744' = '744 CONG ANOM EAR/FACE/NECK*'
    '745' = '745 CARDIAC SEPTAL CLOS ANOM*'
    '746' = '746 OTHER CONGEN HEART ANOM*'
    '747' = '747 OTH CONG CIRC SYST ANOM*'
    '748' = '748 RESPIRATORY SYST ANOMALY*'
    '749' = '749 CLEFT PALATE & CLEFT LIP*'
    '750' = '750 OTHER UPPER GI ANOMALY*'
    '751' = '751 OTH ANOM DIGESTIVE SYST*'
    '752' = '752 GENITAL ORGAN ANOMALIES*'
    '753' = '753 URINARY SYSTEM ANOMALIES*'
    '754' = '754 CONG MUSCULOSKEL DEFORM*'
    '755' = '755 OTH CONGEN LIMB ANOMALY*'
    '756' = '756 OTH MUSCULOSKELET ANOMAL*'
    '757' = '757 CONGEN SKIN ANOMALIES*'
    '758' = '758 CHROMOSOMAL ANOMALIES*'
    '759' = '759 CONGEN ANOMALIES NEC/NOS*'
    '760' = '760 MATERN COND AFF FETUS/NB*'
    '762' = '762 COMPL PLACEN/CORD AFF NB*'
    '765' = '765 EXTREME IMMATURITY*'
    '767' = '767 BIRTH TRAUMA*'
    '768' = '768 INTRAUTERINE ASPHYXIA*'
    '770' = '770 OTH NB RESPIRATORY COND*'
    '771' = '771 PERINATAL INFECTION*'
    '774' = '774 OTHER PERINATAL JAUNDICE*'
    '780' = '780 GENERAL SYMPTOMS*'
    '781' = '781 NERV/MUSCULSKEL SYS SYMP*'
    '782' = '782 SKIN/OTH INTEGUMENT SYMP*'
    '783' = '783 NUTRIT/METAB/DEVEL SYMP*'
    '784' = '784 SYMPTOMS INVOL HEAD/NECK*'
    '785' = '785 CARDIOVASCULAR SYS SYMP*'
    '786' = '786 RESP SYS/OTH CHEST SYMP*'
    '787' = '787 GI SYSTEM SYMPTOMS*'
    '788' = '788 URINARY SYSTEM SYMPTOMS*'
    '789' = '789 OTH ABDOMEN/PELVIS SYMP*'
    '790' = '790 ABNORMAL BLOOD FINDINGS*'
    '791' = '791 ABNORMAL URINE FINDINGS*'
    '792' = '792 ABN FIND-OTH BODY SUBST*'
    '793' = '793 ABN FIND-BODY STRUCT NOS*'
    '794' = '794 ABNORMAL FUNCTION STUDY*'
    '795' = '795 ABN HISTOLOG/IMMUNO FIND*'
    '796' = '796 OTHER ABNORMAL FINDINGS*'
    '797' = '797 SENILITY W/O PSYCHOSIS'
    '799' = '799 OTH ILL-DEF MORBID/MORTL*'
    '802' = '802 FRACTURE OF FACE BONES*'
    '803' = '803 OTHER SKULL FRACTURE*'
    '804' = '804 MULT FX SKULL W OTH BONE*'
    '805' = '805 VERTEBRL FX W/O CORD INJ*'
    '806' = '806 VERTEBRAL FX W CORD INJ*'
    '807' = '807 FX RIB/STERN/LARYN/TRACH*'
    '808' = '808 PELVIC FRACTURE*'
    '809' = '809 FRACTURE OF TRUNK BONES*'
    '810' = '810 CLAVICLE FRACTURE*'
    '811' = '811 SCAPULA FRACTURE*'
    '812' = '812 HUMERUS FRACTURE*'
    '813' = '813 RADIUS & ULNA FRACTURE*'
    '814' = '814 CARPAL FRACTURE*'
    '815' = '815 METACARPAL FRACTURE*'
    '816' = '816 FRACTURE PHALANGES, HAND*'
    '817' = '817 MULTIPLE HAND FRACTURES*'
    '818' = '818 FRACTURE ARM MULT/NOS*'
    '819' = '819 FX ARMS W RIB/STERNUM*'
    '820' = '820 FRACTURE NECK OF FEMUR*'
    '821' = '821 OTHER FEMORAL FRACTURE*'
    '822' = '822 PATELLA FRACTURE*'
    '823' = '823 TIBIA & FIBULA FRACTURE*'
    '824' = '824 ANKLE FRACTURE*'
    '825' = '825 FX OF TARSAL/METATARSAL*'
    '826' = '826 FRACTURE PHALANGES, FOOT*'
    '827' = '827 LOWER LIMB FRACTURE NEC*'
    '828' = '828 FX LEGS W ARM/RIB*'
    '829' = '829 FRACTURE NOS*'
    '830' = '830 JAW DISLOCATION*'
    '831' = '831 SHOULDER DISLOCATION*'
    '832' = '832 ELBOW DISLOCATION*'
    '833' = '833 WRIST DISLOCATION*'
    '834' = '834 DISLOCATION OF FINGER*'
    '835' = '835 DISLOCATION OF HIP*'
    '836' = '836 DISLOCATION OF KNEE*'
    '837' = '837 DISLOCATION OF ANKLE*'
    '838' = '838 DISLOCATION OF FOOT*'
    '839' = '839 DISLOCATION NEC*'
    '840' = '840 SPRAIN SHOULDER & ARM*'
    '841' = '841 SPRAIN ELBOW & FOREARM*'
    '842' = '842 SPRAIN WRIST & HAND*'
    '843' = '843 SPRAIN OF HIP & THIGH*'
    '844' = '844 SPRAIN OF KNEE & LEG*'
    '845' = '845 SPRAIN OF ANKLE & FOOT*'
    '846' = '846 SPRAIN SACROILIAC REGION*'
    '847' = '847 SPRAIN OF BACK NEC/NOS*'
    '848' = '848 SPRAIN NEC*'
    '850' = '850 CONCUSSION*'
    '854' = '854 OTHER BRAIN INJURY*'
    '861' = '861 HEART & LUNG INJURY*'
    '862' = '862 INTRATHORACIC INJURY NEC*'
    '863' = '863 GI TRACT INJURY*'
    '866' = '866 KIDNEY INJURY*'
    '867' = '867 PELVIC ORGAN INJURY*'
    '869' = '869 INTERNAL INJURY NOS*'
    '870' = '870 OCULAR ADNEXA OPEN WOUND*'
    '871' = '871 EYEBALL OPEN WOUND*'
    '872' = '872 OPEN WOUND OF EAR*'
    '873' = '873 OTHER OPEN WOUND OF HEAD*'
    '874' = '874 OPEN WOUND OF NECK*'
    '875' = '875 OPEN WOUND OF CHEST*'
    '876' = '876 OPEN WOUND OF BACK*'
    '877' = '877 OPEN WOUND OF BUTTOCK*'
    '878' = '878 OPEN WOUND GENITAL ORGAN*'
    '879' = '879 OPEN WOUND SITE NEC*'
    '880' = '880 OPN WND SHOULDR/UPPR ARM*'
    '881' = '881 OPEN WOUND OF LOWER ARM*'
    '882' = '882 OPEN WOUND OF HAND*'
    '883' = '883 OPEN WOUND OF FINGER*'
    '884' = '884 OPEN WOUND ARM MULT/NOS*'
    '886' = '886 TRAUM AMPUTATION FINGER*'
    '887' = '887 TRAUMATIC AMPUT ARM/HAND*'
    '890' = '890 OPEN WOUND OF HIP/THIGH*'
    '891' = '891 OPEN WND KNEE/LEG/ANKLE*'
    '892' = '892 OPEN WOUND OF FOOT*'
    '893' = '893 OPEN WOUND OF TOE*'
    '894' = '894 OPEN WOUND OF LEG NEC*'
    '897' = '897 TRAUMATIC AMPUTATION LEG*'
    '900' = '900 HEAD/NECK VESSEL INJURY*'
    '903' = '903 ARM BLOOD VESSEL INJURY*'
    '904' = '904 BLOOD VESSEL INJURY NEC*'
    '908' = '908 LATE EFF INJURY NEC/NOS*'
    '910' = '910 SUPERFICIAL INJURY HEAD*'
    '911' = '911 SUPERFICIAL INJURY TRUNK*'
    '912' = '912 SUPERFIC INJ SHOULDR/ARM*'
    '913' = '913 SUPERFICIAL INJ FOREARM*'
    '914' = '914 SUPERFICIAL INJ OF HAND*'
    '915' = '915 SUPERFICIAL INJ FINGER*'
    '916' = '916 SUPERFICIAL INJ HIP/LEG*'
    '917' = '917 SUPERFICIAL INJ FOOT/TOE*'
    '918' = '918 SUPERFIC INJ EYE/ADNEXA*'
    '919' = '919 SUPERFICIAL INJ OTH SITE*'
    '920' = '920 CONTUSION FACE/SCALP/NCK'
    '921' = '921 CONTUSION EYE & ADNEXA*'
    '922' = '922 CONTUSION OF TRUNK*'
    '923' = '923 CONTUSION OF UPPER LIMB*'
    '924' = '924 CONTUSION LEG & OTH SITE*'
    '927' = '927 CRUSHING INJ UPPER LIMB*'
    '928' = '928 CRUSHING INJURY OF LEG*'
    '929' = '929 CRUSH INJ MULT/UNSP SITE*'
    '930' = '930 FOREIGN BODY EXTERN EYE*'
    '931' = '931 FOREIGN BODY IN EAR'
    '932' = '932 FOREIGN BODY IN NOSE'
    '933' = '933 FB PHARYNX & LARYNX*'
    '934' = '934 FB TRACHEA/BRONCHUS/LUNG*'
    '935' = '935 FB MOUTH/ESOPHAG/STOMACH*'
    '938' = '938 FOREIGN BODY GI NOS'
    '940' = '940 BURN OF EYE & ADNEXA*'
    '941' = '941 BURN OF HEAD/FACE/NECK*'
    '942' = '942 BURN OF TRUNK*'
    '943' = '943 BURN OF ARM*'
    '944' = '944 BURN OF HAND & WRIST*'
    '945' = '945 BURN OF LEG*'
    '946' = '946 BURN OF MULTIPLE SITE*'
    '947' = '947 BURN OF INTERNAL ORGANS*'
    '949' = '949 BURN UNSPECIFIED*'
    '952' = '952 SPINAL CORD INJ W/O FX*'
    '954' = '954 INJURY OTH TRUNK NERVE*'
    '955' = '955 INJ PERIPH NERV SHLD/ARM*'
    '957' = '957 INJURY TO NERVE NEC/NOS*'
    '958' = '958 EARLY COMPLIC OF TRAUMA*'
    '959' = '959 INJURY NEC/NOS*'
    '962' = '962 POISONING BY HORMONES*'
    '963' = '963 POISONING-SYSTEMIC AGENT*'
    '965' = '965 POIS-ANALGESIC/ANTIPYRET*'
    '966' = '966 POISON-ANTICONVULSANTS*'
    '974' = '974 POIS-WATER/MIN/METAB AGT*'
    '977' = '977 POIS-MEDICINAL NEC/NOS*'
    '980' = '980 ALCOHOL TOXICITY*'
    '983' = '983 TOXIC EFFECT CAUSTICS*'
    '984' = '984 TOXIC EFF LEAD & COMPND*'
    '985' = '985 TOXIC EFFECT OTH METALS*'
    '986' = '986 TOX EFF CARBON MONOXIDE'
    '987' = '987 TOXIDE EFF GAS/VAPOR NEC*'
    '988' = '988 TOXIC EFF NOXIOUS FOOD*'
    '989' = '989 TOX EFF OTH NONMED SUBST*'
    '990' = '990 EFFECTS RADIATION NOS'
    '991' = '991 EFF REDUCED TEMPERATURE*'
    '992' = '992 EFFECT OF HEAT/LIGHT*'
    '993' = '993 EFFECTS OF AIR PRESSURE*'
    '994' = '994 EFFECT EXTERNAL CAUS NEC*'
    '995' = '995 CERTAIN ADVERSE EFF NEC*'
    '996' = '996 REPLACE & GRAFT COMPLIC*'
    '997' = '997 SURG COMPL-BODY SYST NEC*'
    '998' = '998 OTH SURGICAL COMPL NEC*'
    '999' = '999 COMPLIC MEDICAL CARE NEC*'
    'V01' = 'V01 COMMUNICABLE DIS CONTACT*'
    'V02' = 'V02 INFECTIOUS DIS CARRIER*'
    'V03' = 'V03 VACCIN FOR BACTERIAL DIS*'
    'V04' = 'V04 VACCIN FOR VIRAL DISEASE*'
    'V05' = 'V05 OTH VACCIN FOR SINGL DIS*'
    'V06' = 'V06 VAC FOR DIS COMBINATION*'
    'V07' = 'V07 PROPHYLACTIC MEASURES*'
    'V08' = 'V08 ASYMP HIV INFECTN STATUS'
    'V10' = 'V10 HX OF MALIGNANT NEOPLASM*'
    'V12' = 'V12 HX OF DISEASE NEC*'
    'V13' = 'V13 HX OF OTHER DISEASES*'
    'V15' = 'V15 OTH HX OF HEALTH HAZARDS*'
    'V16' = 'V16 FAMILY HX-MALIGNANCY*'
    'V17' = 'V17 FAM HX-CHR DISABLING DIS*'
    'V18' = 'V18 FAM HX-OTH SPECIF COND*'
    'V20' = 'V20 HEALTH SUPERVISION CHILD*'
    'V21' = 'V21 CONSTITUT STATE IN DEVEL*'
    'V22' = 'V22 NORMAL PREGNANCY*'
    'V23' = 'V23 SUPERVIS HIGH-RISK PREG*'
    'V24' = 'V24 POSTPARTUM CARE/EXAM*'
    'V25' = 'V25 CONTRACEPTIVE MANAGEMENT*'
    'V26' = 'V26 PROCREATIVE MANAGEMENT*'
    'V28' = 'V28 ANTENATAL SCREENING*'
    'V30' = 'V30 SINGLE LIVEBORN*'
    'V40' = 'V40 MENTAL/BEHAVIORAL PROB*'
    'V41' = 'V41 PROB W SPECIAL FUNCTIONS*'
    'V42' = 'V42 ORGAN TRANSPLANT STATUS*'
    'V43' = 'V43 ORGAN REPLACEMENT NEC*'
    'V45' = 'V45 OTH POSTSURGICAL STATES*'
    'V47' = 'V47 OTH PROBL W INTERNAL ORG*'
    'V48' = 'V48 HEAD/NECK/TRUNK PROBLEMS*'
    'V49' = 'V49 LIMB PROBLEM/PROBLEM NEC*'
    'V50' = 'V50 OTHER ELECTIVE SURGERY*'
    'V51' = 'V51 AFTERCARE W PLASTIC SURG'
    'V52' = 'V52 FITTING OF PROSTHESIS*'
    'V53' = 'V53 ADJUSTMENT OF OTH DEVICE*'
    'V54' = 'V54 OTH ORTHOPEDIC AFTERCARE*'
    'V55' = 'V55 ATTEN TO ARTIFICIAL OPEN*'
    'V56' = 'V56 DIALYSIS ENCOUNTER*'
    'V57' = 'V57 REHABILITATION PROCEDURE*'
    'V58' = 'V58 ENCOUNTR PROC/AFTRCR NEC*'
    'V59' = 'V59 DONOR*'
    'V60' = 'V60 HOUSEHOLD CIRCUMSTANCES*'
    'V61' = 'V61 OTH FAMILY CIRCUMSTANCES*'
    'V62' = 'V62 OTH PSYCHOSOCIAL CIRCUM*'
    'V63' = 'V63 NO MED FACILITY FOR CARE*'
    'V65' = 'V65 OTHER REASON FOR CONSULT*'
    'V66' = 'V66 CONVALESCENCE*'
    'V67' = 'V67 FOLLOW-UP EXAMINATION*'
    'V68' = 'V68 ADMINISTRATIVE ENCOUNTER*'
    'V69' = 'V69 LACK OF PHYSICAL EXERCSE'
    'V70' = 'V70 GENERAL MEDICAL EXAM*'
    'V71' = 'V71 OBSERVATION-SUSPECT COND*'
    'V72' = 'V72 SPECIAL EXAMINATIONS*'
    'V74' = 'V74 SCREENING-BACTERIAL DIS*'
    'V75' = 'V75 SCREEN-OTH INFECTIVE DIS*'
    'V76' = 'V76 SCREENING-MALIG NEOPLASM*'
    'V77' = 'V77 SCREEN-ENDO/NUTR/METAB*'
    'V78' = 'V78 SCREENING FOR BLOOD DIS*'
    'V80' = 'V80 SCREEN-NEURO/EYE/EAR DIS*'
    'V82' = 'V82 SCREEN-OTHER CONDITIONS*'
    ;
 
  VALUE $I9PROXB  
    '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    '01' = '01 INCISE-EXCIS BRAIN/SKULL*'
    '02' = '02 OTHER SKULL/BRAIN OPS*'
    '03' = '03 SPINAL CORD & CANAL OPS*'
    '04' = '04 CRAN & PERIPH NERVE OPS*'
    '06' = '06 THYROID/PARATHYROID OPS*'
    '07' = '07 OTH ENDOCRINE GLND OPS*'
    '08' = '08 EYELID OPERATIONS*'
    '09' = '09 LACRIMAL SYSTEM OP*'
    '11' = '11 OPERATIONS ON CORNEA*'
    '12' = '12 ANTERIOR SEGMENT OPS*'
    '13' = '13 OPERATIONS ON LENS*'
    '14' = '14 POSTERIOR SEGMENT OPS*'
    '15' = '15 EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLE OPS*'
    '16' = '16 ORBIT/EYEBALL OPS*'
    '18' = '18 EXTERNAL EAR OPERATIONS*'
    '19' = '19 MIDDLE EAR RECONSTRUCT*'
    '20' = '20 OTHER MID & INNER EAR OP*'
    '21' = '21 OPERATIONS ON NOSE*'
    '22' = '22 NASAL SINUS OPERATIONS*'
    '23' = '23 TOOTH REMOVAL & RESTORAT*'
    '24' = '24 OTH OPS ON TEETH & GUMS*'
    '25' = '25 OPERATIONS ON TONGUE*'
    '27' = '27 OTHER MOUTH & FACE OPS*'
    '28' = '28 TONSIL & ADENOID OPS*'
    '29' = '29 OPERATIONS ON PHARYNX*'
    '31' = '31 LARYNX TRACHEA OPS NEC*'
    '32' = '32 LUNG & BRONCHUS EXCISION*'
    '33' = '33 OTHER BRONCHIAL/LUNG OPS*'
    '34' = '34 THORAX OPS EXCEPT LUNG*'
    '35' = '35 HEART VALVES & SEPTA OPS*'
    '36' = '36 OPS ON HEART VESSELS*'
    '37' = '37 OTHER HEART/PERICARD OPS*'
    '38' = '38 VESSEL INC/EXCIS/OCCLUS*'
    '39' = '39 OTHER OPS ON VESSELS*'
    '40' = '40 LYMPHATIC SYSTEM OPS*'
    '41' = '41 BONE MARROW & SPLEEN OPS*'
    '42' = '42 OPERATIONS ON ESOPHAGUS*'
    '43' = '43 GASTRIC INCISION/EXCIS*'
    '44' = '44 OTHER GASTRIC OPERATIONS*'
    '45' = '45 INTEST INCIS/EXCIS/ANAST*'
    '46' = '46 OTHER INTESTINAL OPS*'
    '47' = '47 OPERATIONS ON APPENDIX*'
    '48' = '48 RECTAL & PERIRECTAL OPS*'
    '49' = '49 OPERATIONS ON ANUS*'
    '50' = '50 OPERATIONS ON LIVER*'
    '51' = '51 BILIARY TRACT OPERATION*'
    '52' = '52 OPERATIONS ON PANCREAS*'
    '53' = '53 REPAIR OF HERNIA*'
    '54' = '54 OTHER ABDOMEN REGION OPS*'
    '55' = '55 OPERATIONS ON KIDNEY*'
    '56' = '56 OPERATIONS ON URETER*'
    '57' = '57 URINARY BLADDER OPS*'
    '60' = '60 PROSTATE & SEMIN VES OPS*'
    '62' = '62 OPERATIONS ON TESTES*'
    '63' = '63 SPERM CORD/EPID/VAS OPS*'
    '64' = '64 OPERATIONS ON PENIS*'
    '65' = '65 OPERATIONS ON OVARY*'
    '66' = '66 FALLOPIAN TUBE OPERATION*'
    '67' = '67 OPERATIONS ON CERVIX*'
    '68' = '68 OTHER UTERINE INCIS/EXC*'
    '69' = '69 OTHER UTERUS/SUPPORT OPS*'
    '70' = '70 VAGINA & CUL-DE-SAC OPS*'
    '71' = '71 VULVAR & PERINEAL OPS*'
    '73' = '73 ASSIST/INDUCE DELIV NEC*'
    '74' = '74 C-SECTION/REMOVAL FETUS*'
    '75' = '75 OTHER OBSTETRIC OPS*'
    '76' = '76 FACIAL BONE & JOINT OPS*'
    '77' = '77 INCIS/EXCIS/DIV BONE NEC*'
    '78' = '78 OTH BONE OPS EXCPT FACE*'
    '79' = '79 REDUCTION FX/DISLOCATION*'
    '80' = '80 INCISION/EXCISION JOINT*'
    '81' = '81 JOINT REPAIR*'
    '82' = '82 HAND MUSCL/TEND/FASC OPS*'
    '83' = '83 OTHER MUS/TEN/FAS/BUR OP*'
    '84' = '84 OTHER MUSCULOSKELET PROC*'
    '85' = '85 OPERATIONS ON THE BREAST*'
    '86' = '86 SKIN & SUBQ OPERATIONS*'
    '87' = '87 DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY*'
    '88' = '88 OTHER DX RADIOLOGY*'
    '89' = '89 INTERVIEW/CONSULT/EXAM*'
    '90' = '90 MICROSCOPIC EXAM--I*'
    '91' = '91 MICROSCOPIC EXAM--II*'
    '92' = '92 NUCLEAR MEDICINE*'
    '93' = '93 PT, REHAB & RELATED PROC*'
    '94' = '94 PSYCHE RELATED PROCEDURE*'
    '95' = '95 EYE & EAR DX/TREATMENT*'
    '96' = '96 NON-OP INTUBAT & IRRIGAT*'
    '97' = '97 REPLACE & REMOV DEVICES*'
    '98' = '98 NONOP REMOVE FOREIGN BOD*'
    '99' = '99 OTHER NONOPERATIVE PROC*'
    ;

 VALUE $CCCODXB  
    '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    '-8' = '-8 DK'
    '001' = '001 TUBERCULOSIS'
    '002' = '002 SEPTICEMIA (EXCEPT IN LABOR)'
    '003' = '003 BACTERIAL INFECTION, UNSPECIFIED SIT'
    '004' = '004 MYCOSES'
    '005' = '005 HIV INFECTION'
    '006' = '006 HEPATITIS'
    '007' = '007 VIRAL INFECTION'
    '008' = '008 OTHER INFECTIONS, INCLUDING PARASITI'
    '009' = '009 SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS (NOT'
    '010' = '010 IMMUNIZATIONS AND SCREENING FOR INFE'
    '011' = '011 CANCER OF HEAD AND NECK'
    '012' = '012 CANCER OF ESOPHAGUS'
    '013' = '013 CANCER OF STOMACH'
    '014' = '014 CANCER OF COLON'
    '015' = '015 CANCER OF RECTUM AND ANUS'
    '016' = '016 CANCER OF LIVER AND INTRAHEPATIC BIL'
    '017' = '017 CANCER OF PANCREAS'
    '018' = '018 CANCER OF OTHER GI ORGANS, PERITONEU'
    '019' = '019 CANCER OF BRONCHUS, LUNG'
    '021' = '021 CANCER OF BONE AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE'
    '022' = '022 MELANOMAS OF SKIN'
    '023' = '023 OTHER NON-EPITHELIAL CANCER OF SKIN'
    '024' = '024 CANCER OF BREAST'
    '025' = '025 CANCER OF UTERUS'
    '026' = '026 CANCER OF CERVIX'
    '027' = '027 CANCER OF OVARY'
    '028' = '028 CANCER OF OTHER FEMALE GENITAL ORGAN'
    '029' = '029 CANCER OF PROSTATE'
    '030' = '030 CANCER OF TESTIS'
    '031' = '031 CANCER OF OTHER MALE GENITAL ORGANS'
    '032' = '032 CANCER OF BLADDER'
    '033' = '033 CANCER OF KIDNEY AND RENAL PELVIS'
    '034' = '034 CANCER OF OTHER URINARY ORGANS'
    '035' = '035 CANCER OF BRAIN AND NERVOUS SYSTEM'
    '036' = '036 CANCER OF THYROID'
    '037' = "037 HODGKIN'S DISEASE"
    '038' = "038 NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA"
    '039' = '039 LEUKEMIAS'
    '040' = '040 MULTIPLE MYELOMA'
    '041' = '041 CANCER, OTHER AND UNSPECIFIED PRIMAR'
    '042' = '042 SECONDARY MALIGNANCIES'
    '043' = '043 MALIGNANT NEOPLASM WITHOUT SPECIFICA'
    '044' = '044 NEOPLASMS OF UNSPECIFIED NATURE OR U'
    '045' = '045 MAINTENANCE CHEMOTHERAPY, RADIOTHERA'
    '046' = '046 BENIGN NEOPLASM OF UTERUS'
    '047' = '047 OTHER AND UNSPECIFIED BENIGN NEOPLAS'
    '048' = '048 THYROID DISORDERS'
    '049' = '049 DIABETES MELLITUS WITHOUT COMPLICATI'
    '050' = '050 DIABETES MELLITUS WITH COMPLICATIONS'
    '051' = '051 OTHER ENDOCRINE DISORDERS'
    '052' = '052 NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES'
    '053' = '053 DISORDERS OF LIPID METABOLISM'
    '054' = '054 GOUT AND OTHER CRYSTAL ARTHROPATHIES'
    '055' = '055 FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS'
    '056' = '056 CYSTIC FIBROSIS'
    '057' = '057 IMMUNITY DISORDERS'
    '058' = '058 OTHER NUTRITIONAL, ENDOCRINE, AND ME'
    '059' = '059 DEFICIENCY AND OTHER ANEMIA'
    '060' = '060 ACUTE POSTHEMORRHAGIC ANEMIA'
    '061' = '061 SICKLE CELL ANEMIA'
    '062' = '062 COAGULATION AND HEMORRHAGIC DISORDER'
    '063' = '063 DISEASES OF WHITE BLOOD CELLS'
    '064' = '064 OTHER HEMATOLOGIC CONDITIONS'
    '065' = '065 MENTAL RETARDATION'
    '066' = '066 ALCOHOL-RELATED MENTAL DISORDERS'
    '067' = '067 SUBSTANCE-RELATED MENTAL DISORDERS'
    '068' = '068 SENILITY AND ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDER'
    '069' = '069 AFFECTIVE DISORDERS'
    '070' = '070 SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED DISORDERS'
    '071' = '071 OTHER PSYCHOSES'
    '072' = '072 ANXIETY, SOMATOFORM, DISSOCIATIVE, A'
    '073' = '073 PREADULT DISORDERS'
    '074' = '074 OTHER MENTAL CONDITIONS'
    '075' = '075 PERSONAL HISTORY OF MENTAL DISORDER,'
    '076' = '076 MENINGITIS (EXCEPT THAT CAUSED BY TU'
    '077' = '077 ENCEPHALITIS (EXCEPT THAT CAUSED BY'
    '078' = '078 OTHER CNS INFECTION AND POLIOMYELITI'
    '079' = "079 PARKINSON'S DISEASE"
    '080' = '080 MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS'
    '081' = '081 OTHER HEREDITARY AND DEGENERATIVE NE'
    '082' = '082 PARALYSIS'
    '083' = '083 EPILEPSY, CONVULSIONS'
    '084' = '084 HEADACHE, INCLUDING MIGRAINE'
    '085' = '085 COMA, STUPOR, AND BRAIN DAMAGE'
    '086' = '086 CATARACT'
    '087' = '087 RETINAL DETACHMENTS, DEFECTS, VASCUL'
    '088' = '088 GLAUCOMA'
    '089' = '089 BLINDNESS AND VISION DEFECTS'
    '090' = '090 INFLAMMATION, INFECTION OF EYE (EXCE'
    '091' = '091 OTHER EYE DISORDERS'
    '092' = '092 OTITIS MEDIA AND RELATED CONDITIONS'
    '093' = '093 CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DIZZINESS'
    '094' = '094 OTHER EAR AND SENSE ORGAN DISORDERS'
    '095' = '095 OTHER NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS'
    '096' = '096 HEART VALVE DISORDERS'
    '097' = '097 PERI-, ENDO-, AND MYOCARDITIS, CARDI'
    '098' = '098 ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION'
    '099' = '099 HYPERTENSION WITH COMPLICATIONS AND'
    '100' = '100 ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION'
    '101' = '101 CORONARY ATHEROSCLEROSIS AND OTHER H'
    '102' = '102 NONSPECIFIC CHEST PAIN'
    '103' = '103 PULMONARY HEART DISEASE'
    '104' = '104 OTHER AND ILL-DEFINED HEART DISEASE'
    '105' = '105 CONDUCTION DISORDERS'
    '106' = '106 CARDIAC DYSRHYTHMIAS'
    '107' = '107 CARDIAC ARREST AND VENTRICULAR FIBRI'
    '108' = '108 CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE, NONHYPERTE'
    '109' = '109 ACUTE CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE'
    '110' = '110 OCCLUSION OR STENOSIS OF PRECEREBRAL'
    '111' = '111 OTHER AND ILL-DEFINED CEREBROVASCULA'
    '112' = '112 TRANSIENT CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA'
    '113' = '113 LATE EFFECTS OF CEREBROVASCULAR DISE'
    '114' = '114 PERIPHERAL AND VISCERAL ATHEROSCLERO'
    '115' = '115 AORTIC, PERIPHERAL, AND VISCERAL ART'
    '116' = '116 AORTIC AND PERIPHERAL ARTERIAL EMBOL'
    '117' = '117 OTHER CIRCULATORY DISEASE'
    '118' = '118 PHLEBITIS, THROMBOPHLEBITIS AND THRO'
    '119' = '119 VARICOSE VEINS OF LOWER EXTREMITY'
    '120' = '120 HEMORRHOIDS'
    '121' = '121 OTHER DISEASES OF VEINS AND LYMPHATI'
    '122' = '122 PNEUMONIA (EXCEPT THAT CAUSED BY TUB'
    '123' = '123 INFLUENZA'
    '124' = '124 ACUTE AND CHRONIC TONSILLITIS'
    '125' = '125 ACUTE BRONCHITIS'
    '126' = '126 OTHER UPPER RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS'
    '127' = '127 CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEAS'
    '128' = '128 ASTHMA'
    '129' = '129 ASPIRATION PNEUMONITIS, FOOD/VOMITUS'
    '130' = '130 PLEURISY, PNEUMOTHORAX, PULMONARY CO'
    '131' = '131 RESPIRATORY FAILURE, INSUFFICIENCY,'
    '132' = '132 LUNG DISEASE DUE TO EXTERNAL AGENTS'
    '133' = '133 OTHER LOWER RESPIRATORY DISEASE'
    '134' = '134 OTHER UPPER RESPIRATORY DISEASE'
    '135' = '135 INTESTINAL INFECTION'
    '136' = '136 DISORDERS OF TEETH AND JAW'
    '137' = '137 DISEASES OF MOUTH, EXCLUDING DENTAL'
    '138' = '138 ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS'
    '139' = '139 GASTRODUODENAL ULCER (EXCEPT HEMORRH'
    '140' = '140 GASTRITIS AND DUODENITIS'
    '141' = '141 OTHER DISORDERS OF STOMACH AND DUODE'
    '142' = '142 APPENDICITIS AND OTHER APPENDICEAL C'
    '143' = '143 ABDOMINAL HERNIA'
    '144' = '144 REGIONAL ENTERITIS AND ULCERATIVE CO'
    '145' = '145 INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION WITHOUT HERNI'
    '146' = '146 DIVERTICULOSIS AND DIVERTICULITIS'
    '147' = '147 ANAL AND RECTAL CONDITIONS'
    '148' = '148 PERITONITIS AND INTESTINAL ABSCESS'
    '149' = '149 BILIARY TRACT DISEASE'
    '151' = '151 OTHER LIVER DISEASES'
    '152' = '152 PANCREATIC DISORDERS (NOT DIABETES)'
    '153' = '153 GASTROINTESTINAL HEMORRHAGE'
    '154' = '154 NONINFECTIOUS GASTROENTERITIS'
    '155' = '155 OTHER GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS'
    '156' = '156 NEPHRITIS, NEPHROSIS, RENAL SCLEROSI'
    '157' = '157 ACUTE AND UNSPECIFIED RENAL FAILURE'
    '158' = '158 CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE'
    '159' = '159 URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS'
    '160' = '160 CALCULUS OF URINARY TRACT'
    '161' = '161 OTHER DISEASES OF KIDNEY AND URETERS'
    '162' = '162 OTHER DISEASES OF BLADDER AND URETHR'
    '163' = '163 GENITOURINARY SYMPTOMS AND ILL-DEFIN'
    '164' = '164 HYPERPLASIA OF PROSTATE'
    '165' = '165 INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS OF MALE GENI'
    '166' = '166 OTHER MALE GENITAL DISORDERS'
    '167' = '167 NONMALIGNANT BREAST CONDITIONS'
    '168' = '168 INFLAMMATORY DISEASES OF FEMALE PELV'
    '169' = '169 ENDOMETRIOSIS'
    '170' = '170 PROLAPSE OF FEMALE GENITAL ORGANS'
    '171' = '171 MENSTRUAL DISORDERS'
    '172' = '172 OVARIAN CYST'
    '173' = '173 MENOPAUSAL DISORDERS'
    '174' = '174 FEMALE INFERTILITY'
    '175' = '175 OTHER FEMALE GENITAL DISORDERS'
    '176' = '176 CONTRACEPTIVE AND PROCREATIVE MANAGE'
    '177' = '177 SPONTANEOUS ABORTION'
    '178' = '178 INDUCED ABORTION'
    '179' = '179 POSTABORTION COMPLICATIONS'
    '180' = '180 ECTOPIC PREGNANCY'
    '181' = '181 OTHER COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY'
    '182' = '182 HEMORRHAGE DURING PREGNANCY, ABRUPTI'
    '183' = '183 HYPERTENSION COMPLICATING PREGNANCY,'
    '184' = '184 EARLY OR THREATENED LABOR'
    '186' = '186 DIABETES OR ABNORMAL GLUCOSE TOLERAN'
    '191' = '191 POLYHYDRAMNIOS AND OTHER PROBLEMS OF'
    '195' = '195 OTHER COMPLICATIONS OF BIRTH, PUERPE'
    '196' = '196 NORMAL PREGNANCY AND/OR DELIVERY'
    '197' = '197 SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE INFECTI'
    '198' = '198 OTHER INFLAMMATORY CONDITION OF SKIN'
    '199' = '199 CHRONIC ULCER OF SKIN'
    '200' = '200 OTHER SKIN DISORDERS'
    '201' = '201 INFECTIVE ARTHRITIS AND OSTEOMYELITI'
    '202' = '202 RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS AND RELATED DIS'
    '203' = '203 OSTEOARTHRITIS'
    '204' = '204 OTHER NON-TRAUMATIC JOINT DISORDERS'
    '205' = '205 SPONDYLOSIS, INTERVERTEBRAL DISC DIS'
    '206' = '206 OSTEOPOROSIS'
    '207' = '207 PATHOLOGICAL FRACTURE'
    '208' = '208 ACQUIRED FOOT DEFORMITIES'
    '209' = '209 OTHER ACQUIRED DEFORMITIES'
    '210' = '210 SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS AND CON'
    '211' = '211 OTHER CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE'
    '212' = '212 OTHER BONE DISEASE AND MUSCULOSKELET'
    '213' = '213 CARDIAC AND CIRCULATORY CONGENITAL A'
    '214' = '214 DIGESTIVE CONGENITAL ANOMALIES'
    '215' = '215 GENITOURINARY CONGENITAL ANOMALIES'
    '216' = '216 NERVOUS SYSTEM CONGENITAL ANOMALIES'
    '217' = '217 OTHER CONGENITAL ANOMALIES'
    '218' = '218 LIVEBORN'
    '219' = '219 SHORT GESTATION, LOW BIRTH WEIGHT, A'
    '220' = '220 INTRAUTERINE HYPOXIA AND BIRTH ASPHY'
    '222' = '222 HEMOLYTIC JAUNDICE AND PERINATAL JAU'
    '223' = '223 BIRTH TRAUMA'
    '224' = '224 OTHER PERINATAL CONDITIONS'
    '225' = '225 JOINT DISORDERS AND DISLOCATIONS, TR'
    '226' = '226 FRACTURE OF NECK OF FEMUR (HIP)'
    '227' = '227 SPINAL CORD INJURY'
    '228' = '228 SKULL AND FACE FRACTURES'
    '229' = '229 FRACTURE OF UPPER LIMB'
    '230' = '230 FRACTURE OF LOWER LIMB'
    '231' = '231 OTHER FRACTURES'
    '232' = '232 SPRAINS AND STRAINS'
    '233' = '233 INTRACRANIAL INJURY'
    '234' = '234 CRUSHING INJURY OR INTERNAL INJURY'
    '235' = '235 OPEN WOUNDS OF HEAD, NECK, AND TRUNK'
    '236' = '236 OPEN WOUNDS OF EXTREMITIES'
    '237' = '237 COMPLICATION OF DEVICE, IMPLANT OR G'
    '238' = '238 COMPLICATIONS OF SURGICAL PROCEDURES'
    '239' = '239 SUPERFICIAL INJURY, CONTUSION'
    '240' = '240 BURNS'
    '242' = '242 POISONING BY OTHER MEDICATIONS AND D'
    '243' = '243 POISONING BY NONMEDICINAL SUBSTANCES'
    '244' = '244 OTHER INJURIES AND CONDITIONS DUE TO'
    '245' = '245 SYNCOPE'
    '246' = '246 FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN'
    '247' = '247 LYMPHADENITIS'
    '248' = '248 GANGRENE'
    '249' = '249 SHOCK'
    '250' = '250 NAUSEA AND VOMITING'
    '251' = '251 ABDOMINAL PAIN'
    '252' = '252 MALAISE AND FATIGUE'
    '253' = '253 ALLERGIC REACTIONS'
    '254' = '254 REHABILITATION CARE, FITTING OF PROS'
    '255' = '255 ADMINISTRATIVE/SOCIAL ADMISSION'
    '256' = '256 MEDICAL EXAMINATION/EVALUATION'
    '257' = '257 OTHER AFTERCARE'
    '258' = '258 OTHER SCREENING FOR SUSPECTED CONDIT'
    '259' = '259 RESIDUAL CODES, UNCLASSIFIED'
    ;
