GLICKMAN NAMES APPOINTEES TO THE NATIONAL PROMOFLOR COUNCIL
                                            Release No. 0032.97
                                                               
                                 Carol Blake     (202) 720-8998
                                                cblake@usda.gov
                                   Jerry Redding (202) 720-6959
                                              jredding@usda.gov

GLICKMAN NAMES APPOINTEES TO THE NATIONAL PROMOFLOR COUNCIL

     WASHINGTON, Feb. 4, 1997 -- Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman today
announced appointees to the National PromoFlor Council.  The Council
administers the Fresh Cut Flowers and Fresh Cut Greens Promotion and
Information Order. 

     The following members and alternates will serve terms which began Jan. 1
and will end Dec. 31, 1999:  

     Handlers representing Region 1:  Marianne (Tamie) Kimura, Cardiff by the
Sea, Calif., member; and Fredrick R. Teufel, Hillsboro, Ore., alternate.

     Handlers representing Region 2:  James B.  Parks Jr., Dallas, Texas,
member; and J. Michael Miller, Phoenix, Ariz., alternate.

     Handlers representing Region 4: Thomas L. Ziembiec, Elma, N.Y., member;
and Douglas H. Carey, Broad Brook, Conn., alternate.  

     Handlers representing Region 5: Paul C. Zieger, Philadelphia, Pa.,
member; and Stephen T. Dreisbach, Louisville, Ky., alternate.

     Appointees representing Handlers-At-Large: Dwight (Tim) Matsuno,
Brighton, Colo., member; and Robert M. Wilkins, Miami, Fla., alternate.

     Appointees representing importers: Dwight E. Haight, Atlanta, Ga.,
member; and Leslie J. (Jim) Teper, Coral Gables, Fla., alternate. 

     Appointees representing producers east of the Mississippi River: 
Richard E. Hagstrom, Pierson, Fla., member; and Albert S. Riccardi, Berlin,
N.Y., alternate. 

     Appointees representing producers west of the Mississippi River: John H.
Muller, Half Moon Bay, Calif., member; and Grayson M. Inouye, Hilo, Hawaii,
alternate.

     Retailers representing the American Floral Marketing Council: Paul G.
Bachman, Minneapolis, Minn., member; and JoLynn M. Gustin, Cincinnati, Ohio,
alternate.

     In addition, Martin A. Jones, Deland, Fla., was appointed as the
alternate representing producers in Production Area 3 to fill a vacancy for
the term of office ending on Dec. 31, 1998.

     In accordance with the order, the handler, importer and producer
appointees were nominated by handlers, importers and producers, respectively. 
The retailer appointees were nominated by the American Floral Marketing
Council, a national organization that represents retailers.
                                #

NOTE: USDA news releases and media advisories are available on the Internet.
Access the USDA Home Page on the World Wide Web at http://www.usda.gov
