[Federal Register: May 4, 2000 (Volume 65, Number 87)]
[Notices]
[Page 25938-25939]
From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:fr04my00-56]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Food and Drug Administration

[Docket No. 00N-1220]


The Future of the International Conference on Harmonization of
Technical Requirements for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for
Human Use (ICH); Notice of Public Meeting

AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.

ACTION: Notice of public meeting.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing a public
meeting entitled ``The Future of the International Conference on
Harmonization of Technical Requirements for the Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use'' to solicit information and receive
comments on the future of the ICH. The purpose of the meeting is to
solicit public input prior to the next Steering Committee meeting in
Brussels, Belgium, July 2000, at which discussion of the future of the
ICH will be continued.

DATES: The public meeting will be held on May 16, 2000, from 10 a.m. to
2 p.m. Registration must be received by May 9, 2000. Written and
electronic comments regarding the public meeting must be submitted by
May 20, 2000.

ADDRESSES: The public meeting will be held in the Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, Advisory Committee Conference Room, 5630
Fishers Lane, rm. 1066, Rockville, MD 20857.
    Written submissions must be sent to the Dockets Management Branch,
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville,
MD 20852. Two copies of any written comments are to be submitted,
except that individuals may submit one copy. Comments are to be
identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of
this document. Electronic submissions must be sent to the Dockets
Management Branch at http://www.fda.gov/scripts/oc/dockets/comments/
commentsmain.cfm.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Kimberly L. Topper, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research (HFD-21), Food and Drug Administration, 5600
Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 301-827-7001, FAX 301-827-6801, or
e-mail: Topperk@cder.fda.gov.
    Registration: There is no registration fee for this public meeting,
but registration by May 9, 2000, is required. Participation is limited
to the first 140 registrants due to limited space. FDA employees are
required to register to attend the meeting. Interested persons may
register with the contact person via e-mail at: topperk@cder.fda.gov or
fax 301-827-6801 and provide the following information: Name,
affiliation, address, phone, fax, and e-mail address. Interested
persons may also register by mail with the contact person (address
above).

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

    The ICH was established in 1990 as a joint regulatory/industry
project to improve, through harmonization, the efficiency of the
process for developing and registering new medicinal products in
Europe, Japan, and the United States without compromising the
regulatory obligations of safety and effectiveness.
    In recent years, many important initiatives have been undertaken by
regulatory authorities and industry associations to promote
international harmonization of regulatory requirements. FDA has
participated in many meetings designed to enhance harmonization and is
committed to seeking scientifically based harmonized technical
procedures for pharmaceutical development. One of the goals of
harmonization is to identify and then reduce differences in technical
requirements for medical product development among regulatory agencies.
The ICH was organized to provide an opportunity for harmonization
initiatives to be developed with input from both regulatory and
industry representatives. The ICH is concerned with harmonization among
the following three regions: The European Union, Japan, and the United
States. The six ICH sponsors are the European Commission, the European
Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries Associations, the Japanese
Ministry of Health and Welfare, the Japanese Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Association, FDA, and the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America. The ICH Secretariat, which coordinates the
preparation of documentation, is provided by the International
Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Associations (IFPMA). The
ICH Steering Committee includes representatives from each of the ICH
sponsors and the IFPMA, as well as observers from the World Health
Organization, the Canadian Therapeutics Products Programme, and the
European Free Trade Area. The ICH process has achieved significant
harmonization of the technical requirements for the approval of
pharmaceuticals for human use in the three ICH regions. The current ICH
process and structure can be found on the Internet at http://
www.ifpma.org/ich1.html.
    The ICH will present the Common Technical Document and other
significant achievements at the ICH 5 Conference in San Diego in
November 2000. In preparing for this meeting, the ICH Steering
Committee is evaluating the future direction for the ICH, including
structure, processes, work program, and global cooperation. FDA is
soliciting public input at this time to assist the agency in these
deliberations.

II. Issues To Be Discussed at the Public Meeting

    The issues to be discussed include the following: (1)
Administrative and technical issues, (2) future participation, (3)
global cooperation, and (4) new topic areas.
    Interested persons may present data, information, or views, orally
or in writing, on issues pending at the public meeting. Oral
presentations from the public will be scheduled between approximately
10:30 a.m. and 2 p.m. Time allotted for oral presentations may be
limited to 10 minutes. Those desiring to make oral presentations should
notify the contact person by May 9, 2000, and submit: A brief statement
of the general nature of the evidence or arguments they wish to
present, the names and addresses, phone number, fax, and e-mail of
proposed participants, and an indication of the approximate time
requested to make their presentation.

[[Page 25939]]

    The full agenda for the public meeting will be available on May 10,
2000, at the Dockets Management Branch (address above). Requests should
be identified with the Docket Number 00N-1220.

    Dated: April 28, 2000.
Margaret M. Dotzel,
Acting Associate Commissioner for Policy.
[FR Doc. 00-11246 Filed 5-2-00; 11:30 am]
BILLING CODE 4160-01-F
