[Federal Register: November 3, 1999 (Volume 64, Number 212)]
[Proposed Rules]
[Page 59967-60016]
From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:fr03no99-68]

[[pp. 59967-60016]] Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health
Information

[[Continued from page 59966]]

[[Page 59967]]

so through a business partner arrangement that meets the requirements
of proposed Sec. 164.506(e). Any services offered by the bank that are
not on the list of exempt services in 1179 would be subject to the
terms of this rule.
    We recognize that financial institutions' role in providing
information management systems to customers is evolving and that in the
future, banks and credit card companies could develop and market to
health plans and health care providers software designed specifically
to record and track diagnostic and treatment information along with
payment information. In light of the rapid evolution of information
management technology available to plans and providers, we seek comment
on the types of services that financial institutions are performing or
may soon perform for covered entities, and how these services could be
best addressed by this proposed rule.
    Finally, we note that we would impose no verification requirements
for most routine banking and payment activities. However, if a bank or
financial institution seeks information outside payment processing
transactions (e.g., during a special audit), we would require the
covered entity to take reasonable steps to verify the identity of the
person requesting the disclosure.
9. Uses and Disclosures for Research  (Sec. 164.510(j))
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Research'']
    In Sec. 164.510(j), we propose to permit covered entities to use
and disclose protected health information for research without
individual authorization, provided that the covered entity receives
documentation that the research protocol has been reviewed by an
Institutional Review Board or equivalent body--a privacy board--and
that the board found that the research protocol meets specified
criteria (regarding protected health information) designed to protect
the subject. Absent such documentation, the subject's protected health
information could be disclosed for research only with the individual's
authorization, pursuant to the authorization requirements in proposed
Sec. 164.508.
    Our proposed requirements for this disclosure build on the
requirements for such disclosure under the Federal regulation that
protects human subjects in research conducted or funded by the Federal
government, the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects
(often referred to as the ``Common Rule''), first published for several
agencies at 56 FR 28,002-028, 032 (1991), and codified for the
Department of Health and Human Services at 45 CFR part 46.
    a. Importance of research and the need for protected health
information. Much important and sometimes lifesaving knowledge has come
from studies that used individually identifiable health information,
including biomedical and behavioral research, epidemiological studies,
health services research, and statistical activities. This type of
research has lead to dramatic improvements in the nation's health. For
example, the results of such research include the association of a
reduction in the risk of heart disease with dietary and exercise
habits, the association between the use of diethylstilbestrol (DES) by
pregnant women and vaginal cancer in their daughters, and the value of
beta-blocker therapy in reducing re-hospitalizations and in improving
survival among elderly survivors of acute myocardial infarction.
    Likewise, research on behavioral, social, and economic factors that
affect health, and the effect of health on other aspects of life may
require individually identifiable health information. Studies of this
kind can yield important information about treatment outcomes and
patterns of care, disease surveillance and trends, health care costs,
risk factors for disease, functional ability, and service utilization--
which may ultimately lead to improvements in the quality of patient
care, the identification and eradication of public health threats, and
the development of new devices and pharmaceutical products. For
example, such research uncovered the fact that disease screening and
treatment patterns vary with the race of the person, which in turn has
lead to focused outreach programs to improve health. Such research
showed that the results of certain highly invasive surgical treatments
are better when the care is provided in hospitals that performed a high
volume of these procedures.
    It is not always possible for researchers to obtain the consent of
every subject that a researcher may wish to include within a study.
Thousands of records may be involved. Tracking down the subjects may
entail costs that make the research impracticable. The requirement to
obtain consent also may lead to biased study results, because those who
refuse consent may be more or less likely than average to have a
particular health problem or condition. This may be a particular
concern where the research topic involves sensitive or potentially
embarrassing information. At the same time, the privilege of using
individually identifiable health information for research purposes
without individual authorization requires that the information be used
and disclosed under strict conditions that safeguard individuals'
confidentiality.
    b. Definition of research. In proposed Sec. 164.504, we would
define ``research'' as a systematic investigation, including research
development, testing and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute
to generalizable knowledge. This is the definition of ``research'' in
the Common Rule. This definition is well understood in the research
community and elsewhere, and we propose to use it here to maintain
consistency with other federal regulations that affect research.
    For purposes of determining whether an activity is research under
this proposed rule, it would not be relevant whether the information is
given gratis, sold, bartered, rented, or otherwise provided for
commercial gain. The purpose of this proposed rule regarding disclosure
of protected health information for research is to protect the subjects
of the information. Where the activity meets the definition of research
and involves use or disclosure of protected health information, the
rules in this section would apply. We request comments on any aspect of
our proposed definition of research.
    We understand that research and health care operations often look
alike, and may overlap. We have provided definitions for these terms in
Sec. 164.504. We solicit comments on ways to further distinguish
between research and operations, or otherwise clarify the application
of this rule to such activities.
    c. Privacy board review requirement. In Sec. 154.510(j), we would
require covered entities that wish to use or disclose protected health
information for research without individual authorization to obtain
documentation that a privacy board has reviewed the research protocol
and has determined that specified criteria (described below) for waiver
of authorization for use or disclosure of the information have been
met. The board could be an IRB constituted under the Common Rule, or an
equivalent privacy board that meets the requirements in this proposed
rule. We propose to apply these requirements to uses and disclosures of
protected health information by all covered entities, regardless of the
source of funding of the research.
    We propose no requirements for the location or sponsorship of the
IRB or privacy board. The covered entity could

[[Page 59968]]

create such a board, and could rely on it to review proposals for uses
and disclosure of records. An outside researcher could come to the
covered entity with the necessary documentation from his or her own
university IRB. A covered entity could engage the services of an
outside IRB or privacy board to obtain the necessary documentation. The
documentation would have to be reviewed by the covered entity prior to
a use or disclosure subject to this provision.
    Under our proposal, we would require that the documentation
provided by the IRB or privacy board state: (1) That the waiver of
authorization has been approved by the IRB or privacy board; (2) that
the board either is an IRB established in accordance with the HHS
regulations (45 CFR 46.107) or equivalent regulations of another
federal agency, or is a privacy board whose members (i) have
appropriate expertise for review of records research protocols, (ii) do
not have a conflict of interest with respect to the research protocol,
and (iii) include at least one person not affiliated with the
institution conducting the research; (3) that the eight criteria for
waiver of authorization (described below) are met by the protocol; and
(4) the date of board approval of the waiver of authorization. We would
also require that the documentation be signed by the chair of the IRB
or privacy board.
    i. Application to disclosures and uses regardless of funding
source.
    The Common Rule describes conditions under which research may be
conducted when obtaining authorization is not possible. Those
conditions are intended to ensure that research on human subjects,
including research using their health records, is conducted in a manner
that minimizes or eliminates the risk of harm to individuals. The
Common Rule has been adopted by seventeen Federal agencies,<SUP>3</SUP>
representing most of the federal agencies sponsoring human subjects
research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ The following 17 Departments and Agencies have adopted the
Common Rule: (1) Department of Agriculture; (2) Department of
Commerce; (3) Department of Defense; (4) Department of Education;
(5) Department of Energy; (6) Department of Health and Human
Services; (7) Department of Housing and Urban Development; (8)
Department of Justice; (9) Department of Transportation; (10)
Department of Veterans Affairs; (11) International Development
Cooperative Agency: Agency for International Development; (12)
Consumer Product Safety Commission; (13) Environmental Protection
Agency; (14) National Aeronautics and Space Administration; (15)
National Science Foundation; (16) Social Security Administration;
(17) Central Intelligence Agency. In addition, the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy is a signatory to the Common
Rule, but its policy is not codified in the Code of Federal
Regulations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    However, a significant amount of research involving protected
health information is currently conducted in the absence of these
federal protections. Pharmaceutical companies, health plans, and
colleges and universities conduct research supported by private funds.
Identifiable information currently is being disclosed and used by these
entities without individual authorization without any assessment of
risk or of whether individual privacy interests are being adequately
protected.
    The Secretary's Recommendations call for the extension of the
Common Rule principles for waiver of authorization for research uses
and disclosures of identifiable health information to all research. The
Recommendations also propose additional principles that directly
address waiver of authorization for research use of such information.
The Recommendations would require an external board to review proposals
for research on health information under criteria designed to ensure
that the need for waiver of authorization is real, that the public
interest in the research outweighs the individual's privacy interest,
and that privacy will be protected as much as possible. In addition,
the Secretary's Recommendations proposed important restrictions on use
and re-disclosure of information by researchers, and requirements for
safeguarding protected information, that are not currently applied
under the Common Rule.
    Under the Secretary's Recommendations, these requirements would
apply to researchers who want to use or obtain identifiable information
without first obtaining the authorization of the individual who is the
subject of the information. However, under HIPAA, we do not have the
authority to regulate researchers unless the researcher is also acting
as a provider, as in a clinical trial. We can only directly regulate
health care providers, health plans, and health care clearinghouses.
This means that for most research-related disclosures of health
information, we can directly regulate the entities that disclose the
information, but not the recipients of the information. Therefore, in
order to implement the principles in the Secretary's Recommendations,
we must impose any protections on the health plans and health care
providers that use and disclose the information, rather than on the
researcher seeking the information.
    We understand that this approach involves imposing burdens on
covered entities rather than on researchers. However, our jurisdiction
under this statute leaves us the choice of taking this approach, or
failing to provide any protection for individuals whose information is
made the subject of research, or requiring individual authorization
whenever a covered entity wants to disclose protected health
information for research. The second approach would provide no
protection for individuals, and the third approach would make much
important research impossible. Therefore, we are proposing a mechanism
that we believe imposes as little burden as possible on the covered
entity while providing enhanced protection for individuals. This is not
the approach we advocate for new federal privacy legislation, where we
would propose that standards be applied directly to researchers, but it
would be a useful and appropriate approach under the HIPAA legislative
authority.
    We considered a number of other approaches for protecting
information from research subjects, particularly when covered entities
use protected health information internally for research. We considered
approaches that would apply fewer requirements for internal research
uses of protected health information; for example, we considered
permitting covered entities to use protected health information for
research without any additional review. We also considered options for
a more limited review, including requiring that internal uses for
research using protected health information be reviewed by a designated
privacy official or by an internal privacy committee. Another option
that we considered would require covered entities to have an IRB or
privacy board review their administrative procedures, either for
research or more generally, but not to require such review for each
research project. See the preamble section II.E.9.
    We are not recommending these approaches because we are concerned
about applying fewer protections to subjects of private sector research
than are applied to subjects of federally-funded research subject to
Common Rule protections, where IRB review is required for internal
research uses of protected health information. At the same time, we
recognize that the proposed rule would place new requirements on
research uses and disclosures for research projects not federally-
funded. We solicit comment on the approach that we are proposing,
including on whether the benefits of the IRB or privacy board reviews
would outweigh the burdens associated with

[[Page 59969]]

the proposed requirements. We also solicit comment on whether
alternative approaches could adequately protect the privacy interests
of research subjects. We are interested in the extent to which the
proposed rule could affect the amount and quality of research
undertaken by covered entities or by researchers receiving information
from covered entities. People commenting on the proposed rule also may
wish to address the appropriateness of applying different procedures or
different levels of protection to federally and nonfederally-funded
research. We would note that, as discussed below, privacy boards or
IRBs could adopt procedures for ``expedited review'' similar to those
provided in the Common Rule (Common Rule Sec. ____.110) for review of
records research that involves no more than minimal risk. The
availability of expedited review may affect the burden associated with
the proposed approach.
    ii. Documentation of privacy board approval. We considered several
options for applying Common Rule principles to research not reviewed by
Common Rule IRBs through imposing requirements on covered entities. We
chose the use of the privacy board because it gives covered entities
the maximum flexibility consistent with protecting research subjects.
Under this approach, each covered entity that wants to use or disclose
protected health information for research without individual
authorization could obtain the required documentation directly from an
existing privacy board, an internal privacy board created by the
covered entity, or from a privacy board used by the researcher.
    We considered prohibiting disclosure of protected health
information for research unless covered entities enter into contracts,
enforceable under law, which would require the researcher to meet the
review criteria. Under this approach, the covered entity would be
required to enter into a contract with the researcher in order to be
permitted to disclose protected health information without individual
authorization. In the contract, the researcher would agree to meet the
criteria described below, as well as the additional restrictions on
reuse and disclosure and the physical safeguards (also described
below), in exchange for obtaining the information from the covered
entity.
    We did not adopt this approach because of the potentially
burdensome administrative costs that could stem from the need to
negotiate the contracts and ensure that they are legally enforceable
under law. In addition, the covered entity may have little incentive to
enforce these contracts. However, we seek comments on whether the
benefits of this approach outweigh the burdens, whether we could expect
the burdens to be eased by the development of model contracts by local
universities or professional societies, and whether covered entities
could be expected to enforce these contracts. We also seek comments on
whether covered entities could be given a choice between the
documentation approach proposed in this NPRM and a contract approach.
We are particularly interested in comments on this approach, because it
appears to be the only mechanism for including restrictions on reuse
and disclosure by researchers in this proposed rule.
    iii. Use of boards that are not IRBs. The Secretary's
Recommendations state that privacy protections for private sector
records research should be modeled on the existing Common Rule
principles. The cornerstone of the Common Rule approach to waiver of
authorization is IRB approval. At the same time, we understand that
Common Rule IRBs are not the only bodies capable of performing an
appropriate review of records research protocols. In working with the
Congress to develop comprehensive privacy legislation, we have explored
the use of limited purpose privacy boards to review research involving
use or disclosure of health information. If the review criteria and
operating rules of the privacy board are sufficiently consistent with
the principles stated in the Secretary's Recommendations to afford the
same level of protection, there would be no need to insist that the
review board be a formal Common Rule IRB.
    Among the Common Rule requirements for IRB membership, as stated in
45 CFR 46.107, are the following:
    <bullet> Each IRB must have members with varying backgrounds and
appropriate professional competence as necessary to review research
protocols.
    <bullet> Each IRB must include at least one member who is not
affiliated with the institution or related to a person who is
affiliated with the institution.
    <bullet> No IRB member may participate in review of any project in
which the member has a conflict of interest.
    We propose to require that a covered entity could not use or
disclose protected health information for research without individual
authorization if the board that approved the waiver of authorization
does not meet these three criteria.
    We considered applying the additional criteria for IRB membership
stated in the Common Rule. However, many of the additional criteria are
relevant to research generally, but less relevant for a board whose
sole function is to review uses or disclosures of health information.
In addition, the Common Rule IRB membership criteria are more detailed
than the criteria for privacy board membership we propose here. Since
our legislative authority reaches to covered entities, but not to the
privacy board directly, we decided that imposing additional or more
detailed requirements on privacy boards would impose added burdens on
covered entities that did not clearly bring concomitant increases in
patient protections. We continue to support more complete application
of Common Rule criteria directly to these privacy boards through
federal legislation. We believe the approach we propose here strikes
the appropriate balancing between protecting individuals' privacy
interests and keeping burdens on covered entities to a minimum.
    d. Criteria. In Sec. 164.510(j)(2)(iii), we propose to prohibit the
use or disclosure of protected health information for research without
individual authorization unless the covered entity has documentation
indicating that the following criteria are met:
    <bullet> The use or disclosure of protected health information
involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects;
    <bullet> The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the
rights and welfare of the subjects;
    <bullet> The research could not practicably be carried out without
the waiver or alteration;
    <bullet> Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with
additional pertinent information after participation;
    <bullet> The research would be impracticable to conduct without the
protected health information;
    <bullet> The research project is of sufficient importance to
outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of the individual whose
information would be disclosed;
    <bullet> There is an adequate plan to protect the identifiers from
improper use and disclosure; and
    <bullet> There is an adequate plan to destroy the identifiers at
the earliest opportunity consistent with conduct of the research,
unless there is a health or research justification for retaining the
identifiers.
    The first four criteria are in the Common Rule. (The Common Rule
Sec. ____.116(d)).<SUP>4</SUP> These criteria were

[[Page 59970]]

designed for research generally, and not specifically to protect
individuals' privacy interests regarding medical records research. For
this reason, the Secretary's Recommendations include the last four
criteria, which were developed specifically for research on medical
records.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ It should be noted that for the Department of Defense, 10
U.S.C. 980 prohibits the waiver of informed consent. Only those
studies that qualify for exemption per 45 CFR 46.101(b), or studies
that do not meet the 45 CFR part 46 definition of human subjects
research can be performed in the absence of a process to provide
informed consent to prospective subjects. This proposed rule would
not affect DOD's implementation of 10 U.S.C. 980.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    As part of the IRB or privacy board's review of the use of
protected health information under the research protocol, we assume
that in case of a clinical trial, it would also review whether any
waiver of authorization could also include waiver of the subject's
right of access to such information during the course of the trial. See
Sec. 164.514(b)(iv).
    We recognize that the fourth criterion may create awkward
situations for some researchers. Where authorization has been waived,
it may be difficult to later approach individuals to give them
information about the research project. However, in some cases the
research could uncover information that would be important to provide
to the individual (e.g., the possibility that they are ill and should
seek further examination or treatment). For this reason, we are
including this criterion in the proposed rule.
    We also recognize that the fifth criterion, which would ask the
board to weigh the importance of the research against the intrusion of
privacy, would require the board to make a more subjective judgment
than that required by the other criteria. This balancing, we feel, goes
to the heart of the privacy interest of the individual. We understand,
however, that some may view this criterion as a potential impediment to
certain types of research. We solicit comment on the appropriateness of
the criterion, the burden it would place on privacy boards and IRBs,
and its potential effects on the ability of researchers to obtain
information for research.
    The Secretary's Recommendations propose that a researcher who
obtains protected health information this way should be prohibited from
further using or disclosing it except when necessary to lessen a
serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of an individual or
to the public health, or for oversight of the research project, or for
a new research project approved by an IRB or similar board. In addition
the Recommendations propose an obligation on researchers to destroy the
identifiers unless an IRB or similar board determines that there is a
research or health justification for retaining them and an adequate
plan to protect them from improper disclosure.
    We do not have the authority under HIPAA to place such requirements
directly on researchers. While criteria to be met in advance can be
certified in documentation through board review of a research protocol,
a board would have no way to assess or certify a researcher's behavior
after completion of the protocol (e.g., whether the researcher was
engaging in improper reuse or disclosure of the information, or whether
the researcher had actually destroyed identifiers). We instead propose
to require the researcher to show a plan for safeguarding the
information and destroying the identifiers, which the privacy board or
IRB can review and evaluate in determining whether the requested
disclosure is proper. We solicit comment on how to include ongoing
protections for information so disclosed under this legislative
authority without placing excessive burdens on covered entities.
    We note that privacy boards or IRBs could adopt procedures for
``expedited review'' similar to those provided in the Common Rule
(Common Rule Sec. ______.110) Under the Common Rule's expedited review
procedure, review of research that involves no more than minimal risk,
and involves only individuals' medical records may be carried out by
the IRB chairperson or by one or more reviewers designated by the
chairperson from among the members of the IRB. The principle of
expedited review could be extended to other privacy boards for
disclosures for records-based research. Like expedited review under the
Common Rule, a privacy board could choose to have one or more members
review the proposed research.
    e. Additional provisions of this proposed rule affecting research.
    i. Research including health care.
    To the extent that the researcher studying protected health
information is also providing treatment as defined in proposed
Sec. 164.504, such as in a clinical trial, the researcher would be a
covered health care provider for purposes of that treatment, and would
be required to comply with all the provisions of this rule applicable
to health care providers.
    ii. Individual access to research information.
    The provisions of Sec. 164.514 of this proposed rule, regarding
individual access to records, would also apply where the research
includes the delivery of health care. We are proposing an exception for
clinical trials where the information was obtained by a covered
provider in the course of a clinical trial, the individual has agreed
to the denial of access when consenting to participate in the trial (if
the individual's consent to participate was obtained), and the trial is
in still in progress.
    iii. Research on records of deceased persons.
    In Sec. 164.506(f), we propose that, unlike the protections
provided by the remainder of this rule, the protections of this
proposed rule will end at the death of the subject for the purpose of
disclosure of the subject's information for research purposes. In
general, this proposed rule would apply to the protected health
information of an individual for two years after the individual's
death. However, requiring IRB or privacy board review of research
studies that use only health information from deceased persons would be
a significant change from the requirements of the Common Rule, which
apply to individually identifiable information about living individuals
only. In addition, some of the Common Rule criteria for waiver of
authorization are not readily applicable to deceased persons. To avoid
a conflict between Common Rule requirements and the requirements of
this proposed rule, we are proposing that the protections of this
proposed rule end at the death of the subject for the purpose of
disclosure of the subject's information for research purposes.
    iv. Verification.
    In Sec. 164.518(c), we propose to require covered entities to
verify the identity of most persons making requests for protected
health information and, in some cases, the legal authority behind that
request. For disclosures of protected health information for research
purposes under this subsection, the required documentation of IRB or
privacy board approval would constitute sufficient verification. No
additional verification would be necessary under Sec. 164.518(c).
    f. Application to research covered by the Common Rule. Some
research projects would be covered by both the Common Rule and the
HIPAA regulation. This proposed rule would not override the Common
Rule. Thus, where both the HIPAA regulation and the Common Rule would
apply to research conducted by a covered entity, both sets of
regulations would need to be followed. Because only half of the
substantive criteria for board approval proposed in this rule are
applied by IRBs today, this would entail new responsibilities for IRBs
in these situations. However, we believe that the additional burden
would be minimal, since the IRBs will already be reviewing the research
protocol, and will be asked

[[Page 59971]]

only to assess the protocol against some additional criteria. This
burden is justified by the enhancement of privacy protections gained by
applying rules specifically designed to protect the subjects of medical
records research.
    We considered excluding research covered by the Common Rule from
the provisions of this proposed rule. We rejected this approach for two
reasons. First, the additional proposed requirements applied through
HIPAA are specifically designed to protect the privacy interests of the
research subjects, and the small additional burden on IRBs would be
outweighed by the improved protections for individuals. Second, such an
approach would allow federally-funded research to proceed under fewer
restrictions than privately funded research. We believe that the source
of funding of the research should not determine the level of protection
afforded to the individual.
    We note that the definition of ``identifiable'' information
proposed in Sec. 164.504 of this rule differs from the interpretation
of the term under the Common Rule. In particular, if a covered entity
encodes identifiers as required under Sec. 164.506(d) before
undertaking a disclosure of health information for research purposes,
the requirements of this section would not apply. However, the encoded
information would still be considered ``identifiable'' under the Common
Rule and therefore may fall under the human subjects regulations.
    g. Obtaining the individual's authorization for research use or
disclosure of protected health information. If a covered entity chooses
to obtain individual authorization for use or disclosure of information
for research, the requirements applicable to individual authorizations
for release of protected health information would apply. These
protections are described in Sec. 164.508.
    For research projects to which both the Common Rule and this
proposed rule would apply, both sets of requirements for obtaining the
authorization of the subject for research would apply. As with criteria
for waiver of authorization, this proposed rule would impose
requirements for obtaining authorization that are different from Common
Rule requirements for obtaining consent. In particular, the regulation
would require more information to be given to individuals regarding who
could see their information and how it would be used. For the reasons
explained above, we are proposing that both sets of requirements apply,
rather than allow federally-funded research to operate with fewer
privacy protections than privately-funded research.
    h. Need to assess the Common Rule. In general, the Common Rule was
designed to protect human subjects participating in research projects
from physical harm. It was not specifically designed to protect an
individual's medical records when used for research. For research in
which only the medical information of the human subject is used, i.e.,
records research, there are several ways in which the Common Rule
protections could be enhanced.
    In developing these proposed regulations, and in reviewing the
comprehensive medical privacy legislation pending before Congress, it
has become clear that the Department's human subject regulations (45
CFR part 46, 21 CFR part 50, and 21 CFR part 56) may not contain all of
the safeguards necessary to protect the privacy of research
participants. Because the source of research funding should not dictate
the level of privacy protection afforded to a research subject, the
Secretary of HHS will immediately initiate plans to review the
confidentiality provisions of the Common Rule.
    To further that process, we solicit comments here on how Common
Rule protections for the subjects of records review should be enhanced.
For example, we will consider the adequacy of the Common Rule's
provisions regarding conflict of interest, expedited review, exemptions
(such as the exemption for certain research on federal benefits
programs), deceased subjects, and whether IRB's should place greater
emphasis on confidentiality issues when reviewing research protocols.
We also seek comment on whether the Common Rule requirements for
obtaining consent for records research should be modified to reflect
the specific risks entailed in such research.
    In addition, because seventeen other Departments and Agencies are
signatories to the Common Rule and each has its own human subject
regulations, the Secretary of HHS will consult with these Departments
and Agencies regarding potential changes to the Common Rule.
10. Uses and Disclosures in Emergency Circumstances  (Sec. 164.510(k))
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Emergency circumstances'']
    In Sec. 164.510 (k), we propose to permit covered entities to use
or disclose protected health information in emergencies, consistent
with applicable law and standards of ethical conduct, based on a
reasonable belief that the use or disclosure is necessary to prevent or
lessen a serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of any
person or the public.
    a. Importance of emergency response and the need for protected
health information. Circumstances could arise that are not otherwise
covered in the rules proposed in Secs. 164.510(b) and 164.510(f) for
law enforcement and public health, where covered entities may need to
disclose protected health information to prevent or lessen a serious
and imminent threat of harm to persons or the public. Persons at risk
include the individual who is the subject of the protected health
information as well as others. Through their professional activities,
covered entities, particularly health care providers, may obtain
information that leads them to believe that an individual is at risk of
harm to him or herself, or poses a threat to others. This information
could be needed by emergency and first responders (including law
enforcement officials) to deal with or prevent an emergency situation
posing a serious and imminent threat of harm to such persons or the
public.
    b. Proposed requirements. We would permit covered entities,
consistent with applicable law and standards of ethical conduct, to
disclose protected health information based on a reasonable belief that
the disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent
threat to the health or safety of a person or the public. Covered
entities would only be permitted to make such disclosures to persons
who are reasonably able to prevent or lessen the threat, including to
the target of the threat.
    Anticipating all circumstances under which emergency disclosure
could be necessary is not possible. This section must be stated in
somewhat general terms. We intend to permit covered entities to respond
to emergency requests for protected health information, where it is
reasonable for the covered entity to believe that such disclosure would
prevent or reduce a serious emergency situation. Such emergencies may
threaten a single person or the general public. We do not intend to
permit disclosure of protected health information in response to
hypothetical scenarios or potential emergencies that are not imminent
and serious. This permitted disclosure would be narrow; it should not
become a loophole for disclosures not permitted by the other provisions
of the proposed rule.

[[Page 59972]]

    This provision would permit disclosure of relevant information in
response to credible requests from law enforcement, public health, or
other government officials. The covered entity would be permitted to
reasonably rely on credible representations that an emergency exists
and that protected health information could lessen the threat. If the
disclosure was made in a good faith belief that these circumstances
exist, it would be lawful under this section. A covered entity could
also disclose protected health information on its own initiative if it
determined that the disclosure were necessary, consistent with other
applicable legal or ethical standards. Our proposed rule is intended to
permit such disclosures where they are otherwise permitted by law or
ethical standards. We do not intend to permit disclosures by health
care providers or others that are currently prohibited by other law or
ethical standards.
    Disclosure for emergency circumstances could be authorized by
statute or common law and could also be addressed in medical
professional ethics and standards. For example, the American Medical
Association Principles of Medical Ethics on Confidentiality provides
that:

    [T]he obligation to safeguard patient confidences is subject to
certain exceptions that are ethically and legally justified because
of overriding social consideration. Where a patient threatens to
inflict serious bodily harm to another person or to him or herself
and there is a reasonable probability that the patient may carry out
the threat, the physician should take reasonable precautions for the
protection of the intended victim, including notification of law
enforcement authorities.

    The duty to warn third persons at risk has been addressed in court
cases, and the provision proposed permits disclosures in accord with
such legal duties. The leading case on this issue is Tarasoff v.
Regents of the University of California, 17 Cal. 3d 425 (1976). In that
case, a therapist's patient made credible threats against the physical
safety of a specific person. The Supreme Court of California found that
the therapist involved in the case had an obligation to use reasonable
care to protect the intended victim of his patient against danger,
including warning the victim of the peril. Many States have adopted
(judicially or legislatively) versions of the Tarasoff duty to warn,
but not all States have done so. This proposed rule is not intended to
create a duty to warn or disclose but would simply permit the
disclosure under the emergency circumstances consistent with other
applicable legal or ethical standards.
    An emergency disclosure provision does present some risks of
improper disclosure. There will be pressures and uncertainties when
disclosures are requested under emergency circumstances, and decisions
must often be made instantaneously and without the ability to seek
individual authorization or to perform complete verification of the
request. We believe that this risk would be warranted when balancing
the individual's interest in confidentiality against the societal
interests to preserve life and protect public safety in those rare
emergency circumstances where disclosure is necessary. A covered entity
that makes a reasonable judgement under such pressure and discloses
protected health information in good faith would not be held liable for
wrongful disclosure if circumstances later prove not to have warranted
the disclosure.
    We would also exempt emergency disclosures from provisions that
allow individuals to request restrictions on uses and disclosures of
their protected health information for treatment, payment and health
care operations. In emergency situations, health care professionals
need to have any information that will allow them to respond to the
emergency circumstance, and cannot be expected to take the time to
remind themselves of restrictions on particular information. See
proposed Sec. 164.506(c).
11. Disclosure to Next-of-Kin  (Sec. 164.510(l))
[Please label comments about this section with the subject: ``Next-of-
kin'']
    In Sec. 164.510(l), we propose to require health care providers to
obtain a verbal agreement from the individual before disclosing
protected health information to next-of-kin, to other family members,
or to others with whom the individual has a close personal
relationship. Where it is not practical or feasible to request and
obtain such verbal agreement, providers could disclose to next-of-kin,
to other family members, or to others with whom an individual has a
close personal relationship, protected health information that is
directly relevant to the person's involvement in the individual's care,
consistent with good professional health practice and ethics.
    a. Importance of disclosures to next-of-kin and the need for
protected health information. In some cases, disclosure of protected
health information to next-of-kin, to other relatives, or to persons
with whom the individual has a close personal relationship and who are
involved in caring for or helping the individual, can facilitate
effective health care delivery. We do not intend to impede the
disclosure of protected health information to relatives or friends when
expeditious disclosure of such information clearly would be in the
individual's best interest.
    b. Proposed requirements. We propose that when an individual has
the capacity to make his or her own health decisions, providers could
disclose protected health information to the individual's next-of-kin,
to other relatives, or to persons with whom the individual has a close
personal relationship, if the individual has verbally agreed to such
disclosure. Verbal agreement could be indicated informally, for
example, from the fact that the individual brought a family member or
friend to the physician appointment and is actively including the
family member or friend in the discussion with the physician. If,
however, the situation is less clear and the provider is not certain
that the individual intends for the family member or friend to be privy
to protected health information about the individual, the provider
would be required to ask the individual. In these cases, when verbal
agreement can be obtained, that agreement would be sufficient
verification of the identity of the person to meet the requirements of
Sec. 164.518(c).
    We would also permit health care providers to disclose protected
health information without verbal agreement to next-of-kin, to other
relatives, or to persons with whom the individual has a close personal
relationship, if such agreement cannot practicably or reasonably be
obtained and the disclosure is consistent with good health professional
practice and ethics. When verbal agreement cannot be obtained, the
provider would be required to take reasonable steps to verify the
identity of the family member or friend in order to meet the
verification requirement under Sec. 164.518(c). Verbal inquiry would
suffice; we would not require any specific type of identity check.
    We considered requiring a written authorization for each disclosure
in these situations, but rejected that option because it is not
practicable and does not provide sufficient additional privacy
protection to justify the burden it would place on health care
providers and individuals. Many of these conversations are unscheduled
and of short duration, and requiring a written authorization may impede
treatment and detain the individual. Therefore we would allow a one-
time verbal agreement and (where required) verification to suffice for
disclosure of protected health information relevant to

[[Page 59973]]

the individual's care. For example, a health care provider could
disclose protected health information about an individual's treatment
plan to the individual's adult child who is taking the individual home
from the hospital, if the provider has verbally requested and
individual has agreed to providing the adult child with relevant
information about aspects of the individual's health care. Disclosure
also could be appropriate in cases where a verbal agreement cannot
practicably be obtained. For example, a pharmacist could be guided by
his or her professional judgment in dispensing a filled prescription to
someone who claims to be picking it up on behalf of the individual for
whom the prescription was filled.
    In such cases, disclosures would have to follow the ``minimum
necessary'' provisions of proposed Sec. 164.506(b). For example, health
care providers could not disclose without individual authorization
extensive information about the individual's surgery or past medical
history to the neighbor who is simply driving the individual home and
has no need for this information. We request comment on this approach.
    The proposed definition of ``individual'' addresses related
disclosures regarding minors and incapacitated individuals.
12. Additional Uses and Disclosures Required by Other Law
(Sec. 164.510(n))
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Additional uses and disclosures required by other law'']
    In Sec. 164.510(n) we propose to allow covered entities to use or
disclose protected health information if such use or disclosure is not
addressed elsewhere in Sec. 164.510, is required by other law, and the
disclosure meets all the relevant requirements of such law.
    Other laws may require uses or disclosures of protected health
information for purposes not captured by the other provisions of
proposed Sec. 164.510. An example is State workers' compensation laws,
which could require health care providers to disclose protected health
information to a workers' compensation insurer or to an employer.
Covered entities generally could make uses and disclosures required by
such other laws.
    Where such a use or disclosure would also be addressed by other
provisions of this regulation, the covered entity would also have to
follow the requirements of this regulation. Where the provisions of the
other law requirements are contrary to the provisions in this proposed
rule and more protective of the individual's privacy, the provisions of
the other law would generally control. See discussion in section II.I
below.
    We have included this section because it is not our intention to
obstruct access to information deemed important enough by other
authorities to require it by law. We considered omitting this provision
because we are concerned that we do not know enough about the required
disclosures it would encompass, but decided to retain it in order to
raise the issue of permitting disclosures for other, undetermined
purposes. We solicit comment on the possible effects of omitting or
narrowing this provision.
    Under this section, health care providers could make reports of
abuse of any person that are required by State law. All States require
reports of abuse. All States require reporting to child protective
agencies of instances of child abuse or neglect that they identify, and
most States require similar reports of abuse or neglect of elderly
persons. These are valuable requirements which we support and
encourage. The Act (in section 1178(b)) specifically requires that this
regulation not interfere with State requirements for reporting of
abuse. Additionally, all States require health care providers to report
gunshot wounds and certain other health conditions related to violence;
this provision would permit such reports.
    Section 164.518(c), requiring verification of the identity and
legal authority of persons requesting disclosure of protected health
information would apply to disclosures under Sec. 164.510(n). As noted
above, we are not familiar with all of the disclosures of protected
health information that are mandated by State law, so we cannot be
certain that the verification requirements in Sec. 164.518(c) would
always be appropriate. We solicit comments on whether those
requirements would be appropriate for all disclosures that would be
permitted here.
13. Application to Specialized Classes  (Sec. 164.510(m))
    In the following categories we propose use and disclosure
provisions that respond to the unique circumstances of certain federal
programs. We request comment on whether additional provisions are
necessary to comply with the suitability and national security
determination requirements of Executive Order 10450, as amended, and
other national security laws.
    a. Application to military services.
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Military services'']
    To address the special circumstances of the Armed Forces and their
health care systems, we propose to permit military and other federal
providers and health plans to use and disclose protected health
information about active duty members of the Armed Forces for certain
purposes, and to exclude from coverage under this rule health
information about certain persons who receive care from military
providers.
    i. Members of the Armed Forces.
    The primary purpose of the health care system of the military
services differs in its basic character from that of the health care
system of society in general. The special nature of military service is
acknowledged by the Constitutional provision for separate lawmaking for
them (U.S. Constitution, article I, section 8, clause 14) and in their
separate criminal justice system under the Uniform Code of Military
Justice (10 U.S.C. 801, et seq.).
    The military health care system, like other federal and civilian
health care systems, provides medical care and treatment to its
beneficiary population. However, it also serves a critical national
defense purpose, ensuring that the Armed Forces are in a state of
medical readiness to permit the discharge of those responsibilities as
directed by the National Command Authority.
    The health and well-being of military members is key and essential.
This is true whether such personnel are serving in the continental
United States or overseas or whether such service is combat-related or
not. In all environments, operational or otherwise, the Armed Forces
must be assured that its personnel are medically qualified to perform
their responsibilities. This is critical as each and every person
performs a vital service upon which others must rely in executing a
specified defense requirement. Unqualified personnel not only
jeopardize the possible success of an assignment or operation, but they
pose an undue risk and danger to others.
    To assure that such persons are medically fit, health information
is provided to proper command authorities regarding military members
performing certain critical functions for medical screening and other
purposes so that determinations can be made regarding the ability of
such personnel to perform assigned duties. For example, health
information is provided regarding:

[[Page 59974]]

    <bullet> A pilot receiving medication that may affect alertness;
    <bullet> An Armed Forces member with an intolerance for a vaccine
necessary for deployment to certain geographical areas;
    <bullet> Any significant medical or psychological changes in a
military member who is a member of the Nuclear Weapons Personnel
Reliability Program;
    <bullet> A military recruit or member with an illness or injury
which disqualifies him or her from military service;
    <bullet> Compliance with controlled substances policies.
    The military and the Coast Guard obtain such information from their
own health care systems, as well as from other agencies that provide
health care to service members, such as the Department of
Transportation (DOT), which is responsible for the United States Coast
Guard and other federal agencies which provide medical care to members
of the Armed Forces (e.g., the Department of State (DOS) provides such
care to military attaches and Marine security personnel assigned to
embassies and consulates overseas, the Department of Veterans Affairs
provides care in certain areas of the country or in cases involving
specialized services). Other health care providers could also provide
information, for example, when a private sector physician treats a
member injured in an accident.
    The special needs of the DOD and DOT for accessing information for
purposes other than treatment, payment or health care operations were
recognized in the Secretary's Recommendations. We considered several
options for accommodating the unique circumstances of a military health
care environment. We considered providing special rule-making authority
to the DOD and other federal agencies which provide care to members of
the military, but HIPAA does not allow for such delegation by the
Secretary of HHS. Therefore, we propose that health care providers and
health plans of the DOD, the DOT, the DOS, the Department of Veterans
Affairs as well as any other person or entity providing health care to
Armed Forces personnel, could use or disclose protected health
information without individual authorization for activities deemed
necessary by appropriate military command authorities to assure the
proper execution of the military mission.
    The appropriate military command authorities, the circumstances in
which use or disclosure without individual authorization would be
required, and the activities for which such use or disclosure would
occur in order to assure proper execution of the military mission,
would be identified through Federal Register notices promulgated by the
DOD or the DOT (for the Coast Guard). The verification requirements in
Sec. 164.518(c) would apply to disclosures permitted without
authorization.
    This proposal would not confer authority on the DOD or the DOT to
enact rules which would permit use or disclosure of health information
that is restricted or controlled by other statutory authority.
    ii. Foreign diplomatic and military personnel.
    The Department of Defense, as well as other federal agencies,
provide medical care to foreign military and diplomatic personnel, as
well as their dependents. Such care is provided pursuant to either
statutory authority (e.g., 10 U.S.C. 2549) or international agreement.
The care may be delivered either in the United States or overseas.
Also, where health care is provided in the United States, it may be
furnished by non-government providers when government delivered care is
not available or the beneficiary elects to obtain private as opposed to
government health care. Examples include:
    <bullet> Foreign military personnel being trained, or assigned to
U.S. military organizations, in the United States who receive care from
either government or private health care providers;
    <bullet> The DOD operated medical clinic which provides care to all
allied military and diplomatic personnel assigned to NATO SHAPE
Headquarters in Brussels, Belgium;
    <bullet> The DOS, which also is engaged in arranging health care
for foreign diplomatic and military personnel and their families, could
also have legitimate needs for information concerning the health
services involved.
    We believe that the statute was not intended to cover this unique
class of beneficiaries. These persons are receiving U.S., either
private or governmental, furnished health care, either in the United
States or overseas, because of the beneficiary's military or diplomatic
status. For such personnel, we believe that the country-to-country
agreements or federal statutes which call for, or authorize, such care
in furtherance of a national defense or foreign policy purpose should
apply. We propose to exclude foreign military and diplomatic personnel
and their dependents who receive health care provided by or paid for by
the DOD or other federal agency, or by an entity acting on its behalf
pursuant to a country-to-country agreement or federal statute, from the
definition of an ``individual'' in Sec. 164.504. Therefore, the health
information created about such persons by a DOD or other federal agency
health care provider would not be protected under this rule. However,
information created about such persons by covered health care providers
whose services are not paid for by or provided on behalf of a federal
agency would be protected health information.
    iii. Overseas foreign national beneficiaries.
    The Department of Defense, as well as other federal agencies and
U.S.-based non-governmental organizations, provide health care to
foreign nationals overseas incident to U.S. sponsored missions or
operations. Such care is provided pursuant to federal statute,
international agreement, international organization sponsorship, or
incident to military operations (including humanitarian and
peacekeeping operations). Examples include:
    <bullet> The DOD provides general health care to an indigenous
population incident to military deployment;
    <bullet> The DOD provides health care to captured and detained
personnel as a consequence of overseas combat operations. Such care is
mandated by international agreement, i.e., the Geneva Conventions. The
most recent example involves the surrender or capture of Iraqi soldiers
during the conduct of Operation Desert Storm;
    <bullet> A number of federal agencies and non-governmental
organizations provide health care services as part of organized
disaster relief or other humanitarian programs and activities around
the world.
    We believe that the statute did not contemplate these unique
beneficiary populations. Under circumstances where healthcare is being
furnished to foreign nationals incident to sanctioned U.S. activities
overseas, application of these proposed rules could have the unintended
effect of impeding or frustrating the conduct of such activities, and
producing incongruous results. Examples include:
    <bullet> Requiring preparation of a notice advising the local
population of the information practices of the DOD incident to
receiving free medical care as part of disaster relief.
    <bullet> Medical information involving a prisoner of war could not
be disclosed, without the prisoner's consent, to U.S. military
authorities who have responsibility for operating the POW camps.
    Therefore, we propose to exclude overseas foreign national
beneficiaries of health care provided by the DOD or other federal
agency, or by non-governmental organizations acting on behalf of a
federal agency, from the

[[Page 59975]]

definition of an individual. This exclusion would mean that any health
information created when providing health care to this population would
not be protected health information and therefore not covered by these
rules.
    iv. Disclosure to the Department of Veterans Affairs.
    Upon completion of an individual's military service, the DOD
routinely transfers that person's entire military service record,
including protected health information, to the Department of Veterans
Affairs so the file can be retrieved quickly if the individual or his/
her dependents apply for veterans benefits. This practice was initiated
in an effort to expedite veterans benefits eligibility determinations
by ensuring timely access to complete, accurate information on the
veteran's military service. Under the proposed rule, the transfer of
these files would require individual authorization if protected health
information is included. While this change could increase the time
necessary for benefits processing in some cases, we believe the privacy
interests outweigh the related administrative challenges. We invite
comment on whether our assessment of costs and benefits is accurate. We
also invite comment on alternative methods for ensuring privacy while
expediting benefits processing.
    b. Application to the Department of Veterans Affairs.
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Department of Veterans Affairs'']
    We propose to permit protected health information to be used
without individual authorization by and among components of the
Department of Veterans Affairs that determine eligibility for or
entitlement to, or that provide, benefits under laws administered by
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
    This exemption recognizes that the Veterans Administration is two
separate components: The Veterans Health Administration (which operates
health care facilities) and the Veterans Benefits Administration (which
operates the Veterans disability program). The close integration of the
operations of the two components may make requiring individual
authorizations before transferring protected health information
particularly disruptive. Further, the Veterans Health Administration
transfers medical information on a much larger scale than most other
covered entities, and requiring individual authorization for transfers
among components could compromise the Department of Veterans Affairs'
ability to fulfill its statutory mandates.
    Nonetheless, we invite comments on this approach. In particular, we
are interested in whether the requirement for individual authorization
for disclosure of medical records for use in benefits calculations
would increase privacy protections for veterans, or whether it would be
of questionable value since most veterans would authorize disclosure if
it were tied to their benefits. We also are interested in comments on
whether the proposed approach would unreasonably hamper the Department
of Veterans Affairs in its ability to make accurate benefits
determinations in cases in which individuals chose not to authorize
disclosure.
    c. Application to the Department of State.
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Department of State'']
    We propose to permit the Department of State to use and disclose
protected health information for certain purposes unrelated to its role
as a health care provider but necessary for the achievement of its
mission.
    i. Importance of Foreign Service determinations and the need for
protected health information.
    The Secretary of State administers and directs the Foreign Service.
As contemplated in the Foreign Service Act, the Foreign Service is ``to
serve effectively the interests of the United States'' and ``provide
the highest caliber of representation in the conduct of foreign
affairs;'' members of the Foreign Service are to be available to serve
in assignments throughout the world. As called for under the Foreign
Service Act, the DOS has established a health care program to promote
and maintain the physical and mental health of members of the Service
and that of other Government employees serving abroad under chief of
mission authority, as well as accompanying family members. The DOS
provides health care services to thousands of Foreign Service officers,
other government employees and their families serving abroad, many of
whom are frequently changing posts or assignments.
    Worldwide availability for service is a criterion for entrance into
the Foreign Service, so that applicants with conditional offers of
employment must undergo medical clearance examinations to establish
their physical fitness to serve in the Foreign Service on a worldwide
basis prior to entrance into the Foreign Service. Employees and
accompanying family members also must be medically cleared before
assignments overseas, to preclude assignment to posts where existing
medical conditions would be exacerbated or where resources to support
an existing medical condition are inadequate.
    The DOS uses protected health information gained through its role
as a health care provider to fulfill its other responsibilities. The
information is used to make medical clearance and fitness decisions as
well as other types of determinations requiring medical information
(such as fitness for duty or eligibility for disability retirement of
Foreign Service members). Such information is also used to determine
whether to immediately evacuate an individual for evaluation or
treatment, or to determine whether to allow an employee or family
member to remain in a position or at post abroad. An individual's
record can include medical information provided to the DOS with the
individual's authorization by outside health care providers, protected
health information about treatment provided or paid for by the DOS, and
medical information collected from non-treatment processes such as the
clearance process.
    ii. Proposed requirements.
    We are proposing to exempt the DOS from the requirement to obtain
individual authorization (Sec. 164.508) in order to use or disclose
protected health information maintained by its health care program in
certain cases. Specifically, the exemption would apply to the
disclosure or use of protected health information of the following
individuals for the following purposes: (1) Of applicants to the
Foreign Service for medical clearance determinations of physical
fitness to serve in the Foreign Service on a worldwide basis,
including: medical and mental conditions limiting assignability abroad;
conformance to occupational physical standards, where applicable; and
suitability;
    (2) of members of the Foreign Service and other United States
Government employees assigned to serve abroad under Chief of Mission
authority, for (a) medical clearance determinations for assignment to
posts abroad, including: medical and mental conditions limiting such
assignment; conformance to occupational physical standards, where
applicable; continued fitness for duty, suitability, and continuation
of service at post (including decisions on curtailment); (b) separation
medical examinations; and (c) determinations of eligibility of members
of the Foreign Service for disability retirement (whether on
application of the employee or the Secretary);

[[Page 59976]]

    (3) of eligible family members of Foreign Service or other United
States Government employees, for medical clearance determinations like
those described in (2) above to permit such family members to accompany
employees to posts abroad on Government orders, as well as
determinations regarding family members remaining at post and
separation medical examinations.
    The proposed exemption is intended to maintain the DOS's procedures
regarding internal of medical information in conformance with the
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, and 42 CFR Part 2, which would
continue to apply to the DOS. The verification requirements of
Sec. 164.518(c) would apply to these disclosures.
    The DOS is considering the need to add national security
determinations under Executive Order 10450, as amended, and other
suitability determinations to the exempted purposes listed above. We
therefore request comment as to the purposes for which use or
disclosure of protected health information without individual
authorization by the DOS would be appropriate.
    d. Application to employees of the intelligence community.
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Intelligence community'']
    We propose to permit covered entities to disclose protected health
information about individuals who are employees of the intelligence
community (as defined in Section 4 of the National Security Act, 50
U.S.C. 401a), and their dependents, to intelligence community agencies
without individual authorization when authorized by law.
    This provision addresses the special circumstances of the national
intelligence community. The preservation of national security depends
to a large degree on the health and well-being of intelligence
personnel. To determine fitness for duty, including eligibility for a
security clearance, these agencies must have continued access to the
complete health records of their employees. To ensure continued fitness
for duty, it is critical that these agencies have access to the entire
medical record on a continuing basis. An incomplete medical file that
excluded mental health information, for instance, could result in an
improper job placement and a potential breach in security.
    The term ``intelligence community'' is defined in section 4 of the
National Security Act, 50 U.S.C. 401a, to include: the Office of the
Director of Central Intelligence, which shall include the Office of the
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, the National Intelligence
Council (as provided for in 50 U.S.C. 403-5(b)(3) [1]), and such other
offices as the Director may designate; the Central Intelligence Agency;
the National Security Agency; the Defense Intelligence Agency; the
National Imagery and Mapping Agency; the National Reconnaissance
Office; other offices within the DOD for the collection of specialized
national intelligence through reconnaissance programs; the intelligence
elements of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of the Treasury, and
the Department of Energy; the Bureau of Intelligence and Research of
the Department of State; and such other elements of any other
department or agency as may be designated by the President, or
designated jointly by the Director of Central Intelligence and the head
of the department or agency concerned, as an element of the
intelligence community.
    We would permit covered entities to disclose protected health
information concerning employees of the intelligence community and
their dependents where authorized by law. The verification requirements
of Sec. 164.518(c) would apply to these disclosures.

F. Rights of individuals.

    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Introduction to rights of individuals'']
    The following proposed sections are intended to facilitate
individual understanding of and involvement in the handling of their
protected health information. Four basic individual rights would be
created under this section: the right to a notice of information
practices; the right to obtain access to protected health information
about them; the right to obtain access to an accounting of how their
protected health information has been disclosed; and the right to
request amendment and correction of protected health information.
    The rights described below would apply with respect to protected
health information held by health care providers and health plans. We
are proposing that clearinghouses not be subject to all of these
requirements. We believe that as business partners of covered plans and
providers, clearinghouses would not usually initiate or maintain direct
relationships with individuals. The contractual relationship between a
clearinghouse (as a business partner) and a covered plan or provider
would bind the clearinghouse to the notice of information practices
developed by the plan or provider and it will include specific
provisions regarding inspection, copying, amendment and correction.
Therefore, we do not believe the clearinghouses should be required to
provide a notice or provide access for inspection, copying, amendment
or correction. We would require clearinghouses to provide an accounting
of any disclosures for purposes other than treatment, payment and
health care operations to individuals upon request. See proposed
Sec. 164.515. It is our understanding that the vast majority of the
clearinghouse function falls within the scope of treatment, payment,
and health care operations and therefore we do not believe providing
this important right to individuals will impose a significant burden on
the industry. We invite comment on whether or not we should require
clearinghouses to comply with all of the provisions of the individual
rights section.
1. Rights and Procedures for a Written Notice of Information Practices.
(Sec. 164.512)
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Notice of information practices'']
    a. Right to a written notice of information procedures. We are
proposing that individuals have a right to an adequate notice of the
information practices of covered plans and providers. The notice would
be intended to inform individuals about what is done with their
protected health information and about any rights they may have with
respect to that information. Federal agencies must adhere to a similar
notice requirement pursuant to the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C.
552a(e)(3)).
    We are not proposing that business partners (including health care
clearinghouses) be required to develop a notice of information
practices because, under this proposed rule, they would be bound by the
information practices of the health plan or health care provider with
whom they are contracting.
    We considered requiring covered plans or providers to obtain a
signed copy of the notice form (or some other signed indication of
receipt) when they give the form to individuals. There are advantages
to including such a requirement. A signed acknowledgment would provide
evidence that the notice form has been provided to the individual.
Further, the request to the individual to formally acknowledgment
receipt would highlight the importance of the notice, providing
additional encouragement for the individual to

[[Page 59977]]

read it and ask questions about its content.
    We are concerned, however, that requiring a signed acknowledgment
would significantly increase the administrative and paperwork burden of
this provision. We also are unsure of the best way for health plans to
obtain a signed acknowledgment because plans often do not have face-to-
face contact with enrollees. It may be possible to collect an
acknowledgment at initial enrollment, for example by adding an
additional acknowledgment to the enrollment form, but it is less clear
how to obtain it when the form is revised. We solicit comment on
whether we should require a signed acknowledgment. Comments that
address the relative advantages and burdens of such a provision would
be most useful. We also solicit comment on the best way to obtain
signed acknowledgments from health plans if such a provision is
included in the final rule. We also solicit comments on other
strategies, not involving signed acknowledgments, to ensure that
individuals are effectively informed about the information practices of
covered plans or providers.
    b. Revising the notice. We are proposing that covered plans and
providers be permitted to change their policies and procedures at any
time. Before implementing a change in policies and procedures, the
covered plan or provider must revise its notice accordingly. However,
where the covered plan or provider determines that a compelling reason
exists to take an action that violates its notice, it may do so only if
it documents the reason supporting the action and revises its notice
within 30 days of taking such action. The distribution requirements
that would apply when the notice has been materially revised are
discussed in detail below.
    c. Content of the notice. In Sec. 164.512, we propose the
categories of information that would be required in each notice of
information practices, the specific types of information that would
have to be included in each category, and general guidance as to the
presentation of written materials. A sample notice is provided in the
Appendix to this preamble. This sample notice is provided as an example
of how the policies of a specific covered health care provider could be
presented in a notice. Each covered health plan and health care
provider would be required to create a notice that complies with the
requirements of this proposed rule and reflects its own unique
information practices. It does not indicate all possible information
practices or all issues that could be addressed in the notice. Covered
plans and providers may want to include significantly more detail, such
as the business hours during which an individual could review their
records or its standard time frame for responding to requests to review
records; entities could choose to list all types of mandatory
disclosures.
    In a separate section of this proposed rule, we would require
covered plans or providers to develop and document policies and
procedures relating to use, disclosure, and access to protected health
information. See proposed Sec. 164.520. We intend for the documentation
of policies and procedures to be a tool for educating the entity's
personnel about its policies and procedures. In addition, the
documentation would be the primary source of information for the notice
of information practices. We intend for the notice be a tool for
educating individuals served by the covered plan or provider about the
information practices of that entity. The information contained in the
notice would not be as comprehensive as the documentation, but rather
provide a clear and concise summary of relevant policies and
procedures.
    We considered prescribing specific language that each covered plan
or provider would include in its notice. The advantages of this
approach would be that the recipient would get exactly the same
information from each covered plan or provider in the same format, and
that it would be convenient for covered plans or providers to use a
uniform model notice.
    There are, however, several disadvantages to this approach. First,
and most important, no model notice could fully capture the information
practices of every covered plan or provider. Large entities will have
different information practices than small entities. Some health care
providers, for example academic teaching hospitals, may routinely
disclose identifiable health information for research purposes. Other
health care providers may rarely or never make such disclosures. To be
useful to individuals, each entity's notice of information practices
should reflect its unique privacy practices.
    Another disadvantage of prescribing specific language is that it
would limit each covered plan or provider's ability to distinguish
itself in the area of privacy protections. We believe that if
information on privacy protections were readily available, individuals
might compare and select plans or providers based on their information
practices. In addition, a uniform model notice could easily become
outdated. As new communication methods or technologies are introduced,
the content of the notices might need to reflect those changes.
    A covered plan or provider that adopts and follows the notice
content and distribution requirements described below, we would
presume, for the purposes of compliance, that the plan or provider has
provided adequate notice. However, the proposed requirements for the
content of the notice are not intended to be exclusive. Covered plans
or providers could include additional information and additional
detail, beyond that required. In particular, all federal agencies must
still comply with the Privacy Act of 1974. For federal agencies that
are covered plans or providers, this would mean that the notice must
comply with the notice requirements provided in the Privacy Act as well
as those included in this proposed rule.
    i. Uses and disclosures of protected health information.
    In proposed Sec. 164.512, we would require each covered plan and
provider to include in the notice an explanation of how it uses and
discloses protected health information. The explanation must be
provided in sufficient detail as to put the individual on notice of the
uses and disclosures expected to be made of his or her protected health
information. As explained above in section II.C.5, covered plans and
providers may only use and disclose protected health information for
purposes stated in this notice.
    This section of the notice might be as simple as a statement that
information will be used and disclosed for treatment, payment,
administrative purposes, and quality assurance. If the entity will be
using or disclosing the information for other purposes, the notice must
include a brief explanation. For example, some entities might include a
statement that protected health information will be used for clinician
education and disclosed for research purposes. We are soliciting
comment on the level of detail that should be required in describing
the uses and disclosures, specifically with respect to uses and
disclosures for health care operations.
    In addition we would require that notices distinguish between those
uses and disclosures the entity makes that are required by law and
those that are permitted but not required by law. By distinguishing
between uses and disclosures that an entity is required to make those
that the entity is choosing to make, the notice would provide the

[[Page 59978]]

individual with a clearer understanding of the entity's privacy
practices.
    For uses and disclosures required by law, the notice need only list
the categories of disclosures that are authorized by law, and note that
it complies with such requirements. This language could be the same for
every covered entity within a State, territory or other locale. We
encourage states, state professional associations, and other
organizations to develop model language to assist covered plans or
providers in preparing this section of the notice.
    For each type of permissible use or disclosure that the entity
makes (e.g., research, public health, and next-of-kin), the notice
would include a brief statement explaining the entity's policy with
respect to that type of disclosure. For example, if all relevant laws
permit health care providers to disclose protected health information
to public health without individual authorization, the entity would
need to develop policies and procedures regarding when and how it will
make such disclosures. The entity would then document those policies
and procedures as required by Sec. 164.520 and the notice would include
a statement of these policies. For example, the notice might state ``we
will disclose your protected health information to public health
authorities upon request.''
    We considered requiring the notice to include not only a discussion
the actual disclosure practices of the covered entity, but also a
listing or discussion of all additional disclosures that are authorized
by law. We considered this approach because, under this proposed rule,
covered plans or providers would be permitted to change their
information practices at any time, and therefore individuals would not
be able to rely on the entity's current policies alone to understand
how their protected health information may be used in the future. We
recognize that in order to be fully informed, individuals need to
understand when their information could be disclosed.
    We rejected this approach because we were concerned that a notice
with such a large amount of information could be burdensome to both the
individuals receiving the notices and the entities required to prepare
and distribute them. There are a substantial number of required and
permitted disclosures under State or other applicable law, and this
rule generally would permit them to be made.
    Alternatively, we considered requiring that the notice include all
of the types of permissible disclosures under this rule (e.g., public
health, research, next-of-kin). We rejected that approach for two
reasons. First, we felt that providing people with notice of the
intended or likely disclosures of their protected health information
was more useful than describing all of the potential types of
disclosures. Second, in many States and localities, different laws may
affect the permissible disclosures that an entity may make, in which
case a notice only discussing permissible disclosures under the federal
rule would be misleading. While it would be possible to require covered
plans or providers to develop notices that discuss or list disclosures
that would be permissible under this rule and other law, we were
concerned that such a notice may be very complicated because of the
need to discuss the interplay of federal, State or other law for each
type of permissible disclosure. We invite comments on the best approach
to provide most useful information to the individuals without
overburdening either covered plans or providers or the recipients of
the notices.
    In Sec. 164.520, we are proposing to require all covered entities
to develop and document policies and procedures for the use of
protected health information. The notice would simply summarize those
documented policies and procedures and therefore would entail little
additional burden.
    ii. Required statements.
    We are proposing that the notice include several basic statements
to inform the individual of their rights and interests with respect to
protected health information. First, we propose to require the notice
to inform individuals that the covered plan or provider will not use or
disclose their protected health information for purposes not listed in
the notice without the individual's authorization. Individuals need to
understand that they can authorize a disclosure of their protected
health information and that the covered entity may request the
individual to authorize a disclosure, and that such disclosures are
subject to their control. The notice should also inform individuals
that such authorizations can be revoked.
    Second, we propose that the notice inform individuals that they
have the right to request that the covered plan or provider restrict
certain uses and disclosures of protected health information about
them. The notice would also inform individuals that the covered plan or
provider is not required to agree to such a request.
    Third, we propose that the notice also inform individuals about
their right of access to protected health information for inspection
and copying and to an accounting of disclosures as provided in proposed
Secs. 164.514 and 164.515. In addition, the notice would inform
individuals about their right to request an amendment or correction of
protected health information as proposed in Sec. 164.516. The notice
would include brief descriptions of the procedures for submitting
requests to the covered plan or provider.
    Fourth, the notice would be required to include a statement that
there are legal requirements that require the covered plan or provider
to protect the privacy of its information, provide a notice of
information practices, and abide by the terms of that notice.
Individuals should be aware that there are government requirements in
place to protect their privacy. Without this statement, individuals may
not realize that covered plans or providers are required to take
measures to protect their privacy, and may therefore be less interested
in pursuing their rights or finding out more information.
    Fifth, the notice would be required to include a statement that the
entity may revise its policies and procedures with respect to uses or
disclosures of protected health information at any time and that such a
revision could result in additional uses or disclosures without the
individual's authorization. The notice also should inform the
individual how a revised notice would be made available when material
revisions in policies and procedures are made. For example, when a
provider makes a material change to its notice, proposed
Sec. 164.512(e) would require the provider to post a new notice.
    Finally, we propose that the notice inform individuals that they
have the right to complain to the covered entity and to the Secretary
if they believe that their privacy rights have been violated.
    iii. Identification of a contact person for complaints and
additional information.
    We propose that the notice be required to identify a contact person
or office within the covered plan or provider to receive complaints, as
provided in proposed Sec. 164.518(a)(2), and to help the individual
obtain further information on any of the issues identified in the
notice. A specific person would not need to be named in the notice. It
could be an office or general number where someone who can answer
privacy questions or concerns can be reached.
    In Sec. 164.518(d), we are proposing that covered plans and
providers permit individuals to submit complaints to the covered
entity. We are proposing that the contact person identified in the

[[Page 59979]]

notice be responsible for initially receiving such complaints. The
contact person might or might not be responsible for processing and
resolving complaints, but, if not, he or she would forward the
complaints to the appropriate personnel or office. See discussion of
the complaint process in section II.G.4, below.
    In addition to receiving complaints, the contact person would be
able to help the individual obtain further information on any of the
issues identified in the notice. The contact person would be able to
refer to the documented policies and procedures required by proposed
Sec. 164.520. We would not prescribe a formal method for responding to
questions.
    The administrative requirements section below, proposed
Sec. 164.518(a), would also require the entity to designate an official
to develop policies for the use and disclosure of protected health
information and to supervise personnel with respect to use and
disclosure of protected health information. We would not require this
official to also be the contact person. Depending on the size and
structure of the entity, it might be appropriate to require one person
to fill both roles.
    iv. Date the notice was produced.
    We are proposing that covered plans and providers include the date
that the notice was produced on the face of the notice. We would also
encourage the provider to highlight or otherwise emphasize any changes
to help the individual recognize such changes.
    d. Requirements for distribution of the notice. It is critical to
the effectiveness of this proposed rule that individuals be given the
notice often enough to remind them of their rights, but without
overburdening covered plans or providers. We propose that all covered
plans and providers would be required to make their notice available to
any individual upon request, regardless of whether the requestor is
already a patient or enrollee. We believe that broad availability would
encourage individuals or organizations to compare the privacy practices
of plans or providers to assist in making enrollment or treatment
choices. We also propose additional distribution requirements for
updating notices, which would be different for health plans and health
care providers. The requirements for health plans and health care
providers are different because we recognize that they have contact
with individuals at different points in time in the health care system.
    i. Health plans.
    We considered a variety of combinations of distribution practices
for health plans and are proposing what we believe is the most
reasonable approach. We would require health plans to distribute the
notice by the effective date of the final rule, at enrollment, within
60 days of a material change to the plan's information practices, and
at least once every three years.
    We considered requiring health plans to post the notice either in
addition to or instead of distribution. Because most individuals rarely
visit the office of their health plan, we do not believe that this
would be an effective means of communication. We also considered either
requiring distribution of the notice more or less frequently than every
three years. As compared to most health care providers, we believe that
health plans often are larger and have existing administrative systems
to cost effectively provide notification to individuals. Three years
was chosen as a compromise between the importance of reminding
individuals of their plans' information practices and the need to keep
the burden health plans to the minimum necessary to achieve this
objective. We are soliciting comment on whether requiring a notice
every three years is reasonable for health plans.
    ii. Health care providers.
    We are proposing to require that covered health care providers
provide a copy of the notice to every individual served at the time of
first service delivery, that they post the notice in a clear and
prominent location where it is reasonable to expect individuals seeking
service from the provider to be able to read the notice, and that
copies be available on-site for individuals to take with them. In
addition, we are proposing to require that covered health care
providers provide a copy of the notice to individuals they are
currently serving at their first instances of service delivery within a
year of the effective date of the final rule.
    We would not require health care providers to mail or otherwise
disseminate their notices after giving the notice to individuals at the
time of the first service delivery. Health care providers' patient
lists may include individuals they have not served in decades. It would
be difficult for providers to distinguish between ``active'' patients,
those who are seen rarely, and those who have moved to different
providers. While some individuals will continue to be concerned with
the information practices of providers who treated them in the distant
past, overall the burden of an active distribution requirement would
not be outweighed by improved individual control and privacy
protection.
    We recognize that some health care providers, such as clinical
laboratories, pathologists and mail order pharmacies, do not have face-
to-face contact with individuals during service delivery. Such
providers would be required to provide the required notice in a
reasonable period of time following first service delivery, through
mail, electronic notice (i.e. e-mail), or other appropriate medium. For
example, a web-based pharmacy could meet this distribution requirement
by providing a prominent and conspicuous link to its notice on its home
page and by requiring review of that notice before processing an order.
    If a provider wishes to make a material change in the information
practices addressed in the notice, it would be required to revise its
notice in advance. After making the revision, the provider would be
required to post the new notice promptly. We believe that this approach
creates the minimum burden for health care providers consistent with
giving individuals a clear source of accurate information.
    e. Plain language requirement. We are proposing to apply a plain
language requirement to notices developed by covered plans or providers
under these proposed rules. A covered plan or provider could satisfy
the plain language requirement if it made a reasonable effort to:
organize material to serve the needs of the reader; write sentences in
the active voice, use ``you'' and other pronouns; use common, everyday
words in sentences; write in short sentences; and divide material into
short sections.
    We also considered proposing formatting specifications such as
requiring the covered plan or provider to use easy-to-read design
features (e.g., lists, tables, graphics, contrasting colors, and white
space), type face, and font size in the notice. We are soliciting
comment on whether these additional format specifications should be
required.
    The purpose of the notice proposed in the rules below is to tell
the recipient how protected health information collected about them
will be used. Recipients who cannot understand the entity's notice
would miss important information about their privacy rights and how the
entity is protecting health information about them. One of the goals of
this proposed rule is to create an environment of open communication
and transparency with respect to the use and disclosure of protected
health information. A lack of clarity in the notice could undermine
this goal and

[[Page 59980]]

create misunderstandings. Covered plans or providers have an incentive
to make their notice statements clear and concise. We believe that the
more understandable notices are, the more confidence the public will
have in the entity's commitment to protecting the privacy of health
information.
    It is important that the content of the notice be communicated to
all recipients and therefore we would encourage the covered plan or
provider to consider alternative means of communicating with certain
populations. We note that any covered entity that is a recipient of
federal financial assistance is generally obligated under title VI of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to provide material ordinarily distributed
to the public in the primary languages of persons with limited English
proficiency in the recipients' service areas. Specifically, this title
VI obligation provides that, where a significant number or proportion
of the population eligible to be served or likely to be directly
affected by a federally assisted program need service or information in
a language other than English in order to be effectively informed of or
participate in the program, the recipient shall take reasonable steps,
considering the scope of the program and the size and concentration of
such population, to provide information in language appropriate to such
persons. For entities not subject to title VI, the title VI standards
provide helpful guidance for effectively communicating the content of
their notices to non-English speaking populations.
    We also would encourage covered plans or providers to be attentive
to the needs of individuals who cannot read. For example, an employee
of the entity could read the notice to individuals upon request or the
notice could be incorporated into a video presentation that is played
in the waiting area.
    The requirement of a printed notice should not be interpreted as a
limitation. For example, if an individual who is requesting a notice
from a covered plan or providers were to ask to receive the notice via
e-mail, the requirements of this proposed rule could be met by
providing the notice via e-mail. The proposed rule would not preclude
the use of alternative forms of providing the notice and we would
encourage covered plans or providers to use other forms of
distribution, such as posting their privacy notices on their web sites.
While this will not substitute for paper distribution when that is
requested by an individual, it may reduce the number of requests for
paper copies.
2. Rights and Procedures for Access for Inspection and Copying
(Sec. 164.514)
    a. Right of access for inspection or copying. (Sec. 164.514(a))
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Access for inspection or copying'']
    In Sec. 164.514, we are proposing that, with very limited
exceptions, individuals have a right to inspect and copy protected
health information about them maintained by a covered health plan or
health care provider in a designated record set. Individuals would also
have a right of access to protected health information in a designated
record set that is maintained by a business partner of a covered plan
or provider when such information is not a duplicate of the information
held by the plan or provider, including when the business partner is
the only holder of the information or when the business partner has
materially altered the protected health information that has been
provided to it.
    This right of access means that an individual would be able to
either inspect or obtain copies of his or her health information
maintained in a designated record set by covered plans and providers
and, in limited circumstances, by their business partners. Inspection
and copying is a fundamental aspect of protecting privacy; this right
empowers individuals by helping them to understand the nature of the
health information about them that is held by their providers and plans
and to correct errors. In order to facilitate an open and cooperative
relationship with providers and allow the individual a fair opportunity
to know what information is held by an entity, inspection and copying
should be permitted in almost every case.
    While the right to have access to one's information may appear
somewhat different from the right to keep information private, these
two policy goals have always been closely tied. For example,
individuals are given an almost absolute right of access to information
in federal health record systems under the Privacy Act of 1974 (5
U.S.C. 552a(d)). The Privacy Protection Study Commission recommended
that this right be available. (Personal Privacy in an Information
Society 299 (1977)). The right of access was a key component of the
President's Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in
the Health Care Industry recommendations in the Consumer Bill of Rights
and Responsibilities. The Commission's report stated that consumers
should ``have the right to review and copy their own medical records
and request amendments to their records.'' (Consumer Bill of Rights and
Responsibilities, Chapter Six: Confidentiality of Health Information,
November 1997). Most recently, the Health Privacy Project issued a
statement of ``Best Principles for Health Privacy'' that included the
same recommendation. Health Privacy Project, Institute for Health
Policy Solutions, Georgetown University (June 1999) (http://
www.healthprivacy.org).
    Open access to health information can benefit both the individuals
and the covered entities. It allows individuals to better understand
their own diagnosis and treatment, and to become more active
participants in their health care. It can increase communication,
thereby enhancing individuals' trust in their health care providers and
increasing compliance with the providers' instructions. If individuals
have access to and understand their health information, changing
providers may not disrupt health care or create risks based on lack of
information (e.g., drug allergies or unnecessary duplication of tests).
    i. Information available for inspection and copying.
    In Sec. 164.514(a), we are proposing to give the individual a right
of access to information that is maintained in a designated record set.
We intend to provide a means for individuals to have access to any
protected health information that is used to affect their rights and
interests. This would include, for example, information that would be
used to make health care decisions or information that would be used in
determining whether an insurance claim would be paid. Covered plans or
providers often incorporate the same protected health information that
is used to make these types of decisions into a variety of different
data systems. Not all of those data systems will be utilized to make
determinations about specific individuals. For example, information
systems that are used for quality control analyses are not usually used
to make determinations about a specific patient. We would not require
access to these other systems.
    In order to ensure that individuals have access to the protected
health information that is used, we are introducing the concept of a
``designated record set.'' In using the term ``designated record set,''
we are drawing on the concept of a ``system of records'' that is used
in the Privacy Act. Under the Privacy Act, federal agencies must
provide an individual with access to ``information pertaining to him
which

[[Page 59981]]

is contained in (a system of records).'' 5 U.S.C. 552a(d)(1). A
``system of records'' is defined as ``a group of any records under the
control of any agency from which information is retrieved by the name
of the individual or by some identifying number, symbol, or other
identifying particular assigned to the individual.'' 5 U.S.C.
552a(a)(5). Under this rule, a ``designated record set'' would be ``a
group of any records under the control of any covered entity from which
information is retrieved by the name of the individual or by some
identifying number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to
the individual.'' See discussion in section II.B.
    Files used to backup a primary data system or the sequential files
created to transmit a batch of claims to a clearinghouse are clear
examples of data files which do not fall under this definition. We
rejected requiring individual access to all records in which she or he
was identifiable because of the extreme burden it would place on
covered plans or providers without providing additional information or
protection for the individual. We also rejected using the subset of
such records which were accessed directly by individual identifiers
because of the redundancy of information involved and the increasing
use of database management systems to replace legacy systems that do
sequential processing. These would be accessed by individual identifier
but would contain redundant data and be used for routine processing
that did not directly affect the individual. We concluded that access
to only such record sets that were actually accessed by individual
identifier and that were used to make substantive decisions that affect
individuals would provide the desired information with a minimum of
burden for the covered plans or providers.
    We note that the standard would apply to records that are
``retrieved'' by an identifier and not records that are only
``retrievable'' by an identifier. In many cases, technology will permit
sorting and retrieving by a variety of fields and therefore the
``retrievable'' standard would be relatively meaningless. We intend to
limit access to those sets of records actually used to affect the
interests of the individual.
    We believe that by providing access to protected health information
maintained in a designated record set, we would be ensuring that
individuals will be able to inspect or copy relevant and appropriate
information without placing too significant of a burden on covered
plans or providers. We are soliciting comment on whether limiting
access to information maintained in a designated record set is an
appropriate standard when applied to covered plans and providers and
their business partners.
    ii. Right of access to information maintained by business partners.
    In Sec. 164.506(e), we are proposing that covered plans and
providers include specific terms in their contract with each business
partner. One of the required terms would be that the business partner
must provide for inspection and copying of protected health information
as provided in this section. Because our authority is limited by HIPAA
to the covered entities, we must rely upon covered plans and providers
to ensure that all of the necessary protected health information
provided by the individual to the plan or provider is available for
inspection and copying. We would require covered plans and providers to
provide access to information held in the custody of a business partner
when it is different from information maintained by the covered plan or
provider. We identified two instances where this seemed appropriate:
when the protected health information is only in the custody of a
business partner and not in the custody of the covered plan or
provider; and when protected health information has been materially
altered by a business partner. We are soliciting comment on whether
there are other instances where access should be provided to protected
health information in the custody of a business partner.
    Other than in their capacity as business partners, we are not
proposing to require clearinghouses to provide access for inspection
and copying. As explained above in section II.C.5, clearinghouses would
usually be business partners under this proposed rule and therefore
they would be bound by the contract with the covered plan or provider.
See proposed Sec. 164.506(e). We carefully considered whether to
require clearinghouses to provide access for inspection and copying
above and beyond their obligations as a business partner, but
determined that the typical clearinghouse activities of translating
record formats and batching transmissions do not involve setting up
designated record sets on individuals. Although the data maintained by
the clearinghouse is protected health information, it is normally not
accessed by individual identifier and an individual's records could not
be found except at great expense. In addition, although clearinghouses
process protected health information and discover errors, they do not
create the data and make no changes in the original data. They,
instead, refer the errors back to the source for correction. Thus,
individual access to clearinghouse records provides no new information
to the individual but could impose a significant burden on the
industry.
    As technology improves it is likely that clearinghouses will find
ways to take advantage of databases of protected health information
that aggregate records on the basis of the individual subject of the
information. This technology would allow more cost-effective access to
clearinghouse records on individuals and therefore access for
inspection and copying could be appropriate and reasonable.
    iii. Duration of the right of access.
    We are proposing that covered plans and providers be required to
provide access for as long as the entity maintains the protected health
information. We considered requiring covered plans and providers to
provide access for a specific period or defining a specific retention
period. We rejected that approach because many laws and professional
standards already designate specific retention periods and we did not
want to create unnecessary confusion. In addition, we concluded that
individuals should be permitted to have access for as long as the
information is maintained by the covered plan or provider. We are
soliciting comments on whether we should include a specific duration
requirement in this proposed rule.
    b. Grounds for denial of access for inspection and copying.
Proposed Sec. 164.514 would permit denial of inspection and copying
under very limited circumstances. The categories of denials would not
be mandatory; the entity could always elect to provide all of the
requested health information to the individual. For each request by an
individual, the entity could provide all of the information requested
or it could evaluate the requested information, consider the
circumstances surrounding the individual's request, and make a
determination as to whether that request should be granted or denied.
We intend to create narrow exceptions to the stated rule of open access
and we would expect covered plans and providers to employ these
exceptions rarely, if at all.
    In proposing these categories of permissible denials, we are not
intending to create a legal duty for the entity to review all of the
health information before releasing it. Rather, we are proposing them
as a means of preserving the flexibility and judgment of covered plans
or providers under appropriate circumstances.

[[Page 59982]]

    Entities subject to the Privacy Act would not be able to deny a
request for inspection and copying under all of the circumstances
permitted by this proposed rule. They would continue to be governed by
the denials permitted by the Privacy Act and applicable regulations.
See section II.I.4.a for further discussion.
    i. Disclosures reasonably likely to endanger life or physical
safety.
    In Sec. 164.514(b)(1)(i), we propose that covered plans and
providers be permitted to deny a request for inspection or copying if a
licensed health care professional has determined that, in the exercise
of reasonable professional judgment, the inspection and copying
requested is reasonably likely to endanger the life or physical safety
of the individual or another person. Denial based on this provision, as
with all of the provisions in this section, would be discretionary.
While it is important to protect the individual and others from
physical harm, we are also concerned about the subjectivity of the
standard and are soliciting comments on how to incorporate a more
objective standard into this provision.
    We are proposing that covered plans and providers should only
consider denying a request for inspection and copying under this
provision in situations where a licensed health care professional (such
as a physician, physician's assistant or nurse) makes the determination
that access for inspection and copying would be reasonably likely to
endanger life or physical safety. We are proposing to require a
licensed health care professional to make the determination because it
would rely entirely on the existing standards and ethics in the medical
profession. In some instances, the covered plan or provider would be a
licensed health care professional and therefore, he or she could make
the determination independently. However, when the request is made to a
health plan, the entity would need to consult with a health care
professional in order to deny access under this provision.
    We are soliciting comments as to whether the determination under
this provision should be limited to health care professionals who have
an existing relationship with the individual. While such a limitation
would significantly restrict the scope of this provision and could
reduce the number of denials of requests for inspection and copying, it
could also ensure that the determination of potential harm is as
accurate as possible.
    By proposing to allow covered plans and providers to deny a request
for inspection and copying based on potential endangerment, we are not
suggesting that entities should deny a request on that basis. This
provision is not intended to be used liberally as a means of denial of
individual inspection and copying rights for all mental health records
or other ``sensitive'' health information. Each request for access
would have to be assessed on its own merits. We would expect the
medical community to rely on its current professional standards for
determining what constitutes a threat to life or physical safety.
    As explained above, we are not proposing to create a new ``duty''
whereby entities can be held liable for failure to deny inspection and
copying. We simply are acknowledging that some providers, based on
reasonable professional judgment, may already assume a duty to protect
an individual from some aspect of their health information because of
the potential for physical harm. The most commonly cited example is
when an individual exhibits suicidal or homicidal tendencies. If a
health care professional determines that an individual exhibits such
tendencies and that permitting inspection or copying of some of their
health information could reasonably result in the individual committing
suicide, murder or other physical violence, then the individual could
be denied access to that information.
    We considered whether covered plans and providers should be
permitted to deny access on the basis of sensitivity of the health
information or the potential for causing emotional or psychological
harm. Many States allow denial of access on similar grounds. In
balancing the desire to provide individual access against the need to
protect the individual, we concluded that the individual access should
prevail because in the current age of health care , it is critical that
the individual is aware of his or her health information.
    Therefore, if a health care professional determines that inspection
and copying of the requested information may cause emotional or
psychological harm, but is not reasonably likely to endanger the life
or physical safety of the individual or another person, then the
covered plan or provider would not be permitted to deny the
individual's request. If the entity is concerned about the potential
for emotional or psychological harm, we would encourage it to offer
special procedures for explaining the information or counseling the
individual. For example, an entity could offer to have a nurse or other
employee review the information or the format with the individual or
provide supplemental written materials explaining a diagnosis. If the
entity elects to offer such special procedures, the entity would not be
permitted to condition inspection and copying upon compliance with the
procedures. We are not proposing to require covered plans or providers
to establish any informational or counseling procedures and we are not
proposing that individuals be required to comply with any procedures in
order to obtain access to their protected health information. We invite
comment on whether a standard such as emotional distress or
psychological harm should be included as a reason for which a covered
plan or provider could deny a request for inspection or copying.
    ii. Disclosures likely to cause harm to another individual.
    We propose that covered plans and providers be permitted to deny a
request for inspection or copying if the information requested is about
another person (other than a health care provider) and a licensed
health care professional has determined that inspection or copying is
reasonably likely to cause substantial harm to that other person. We
believe that it is rare that information about one person would be
maintained within the health records of another without one or both of
their knowledge. On some occasions when health information about one
person is relevant to the care of another, a physician may incorporate
it into the latter's record, such as information from group therapy
sessions and illnesses with a genetic component. In some instances the
information could be shared without harm, or may already be known to
the individual. There may, however, be situations where disclosure
could harm the other person, such as by implicitly revealing facts
about past sexual behavior, nonpaternity, or similarly sensitive
information. This provision would permit withholding of information in
such cases.
    We believe that this determination should be based on the existing
standards and ethics in the medical profession. We are soliciting
comments on whether the determination under this provision should be
limited to health care professionals who have an existing relationship
with the person who is expected to be harmed as a result of the
inspection or copying.
    Information about a third party may appear in an individual's
records unbeknownst to the individual. In such cases if the individual
chooses to exercise her right to inspect her protected health
information, the covered plan or provider providing her access would be
making an

[[Page 59983]]

unauthorized disclosure unless the third party has provided a written
authorization. We considered requiring that access to such information
be denied because the third party had not provided an authorization. We
considered proposing that the covered plan or provider would be
required to deny an individual's request for access to any information
about another person, unless there was a potential for harm to the
individual who would be denied. This would have been the only instance
where we would require that access be denied as a general rule. We
recognized that such requirements would ultimately require covered
plans and providers to review every piece of protected health
information before permitting inspection and copying to determine if
information about another person was included and whether the requester
would be harmed without such information. We concluded that this would
impose a significant burden on covered plans and providers. We seek
comment on whether and how often individual health records contain
identifiable information about other persons, and current practice
relating to the handling of such information in response to individual
requests for access.
    iii. Disclosures of confidential information likely to reveal the
source.
    We propose that covered plans or providers be permitted to deny a
request for inspection and copying if the entity determines that the
requested information was obtained under a promise of confidentiality
from someone other than a health care provider and such access would be
likely to reveal the source of the information. This provision is
intended to preserve an entity's ability to maintain an implicit or
explicit promise of confidentiality.
    Covered plans and providers would not be permitted to deny access
when the information has been obtained from another health care
provider. An individual is entitled to have access to all information
about him or her generated by the health care system (apart from the
other exceptions we propose here), and confidentiality promises by
health care providers to other providers should not interfere with that
access.
    iv. Disclosures of clinical trial information.
    While a clinical trial is research, it is also health care as
defined in Sec. 160.103, and the information generated in the course of
the trial would be protected health information. In
Sec. 164.514(b)(iv), we are proposing that a researcher/provider could
deny a request for inspection and copying of the clinical trial record
if the trial is still in progress, and the subject-patient had agreed
to the denial of access in conjunction with the subject's consent to
participate in the trial. The IRB or privacy board would determine
whether such waiver of access to information is appropriate, as part of
its review of the research protocol. In the rare instances in which
individuals are enrolled in trials without consent (such as those
permitted under FDA regulations, at 21 CFR 50.23), the covered entity
could deny access to information during the course of the trial even
without advance subject consent.
    Clinical trials are often masked--the subjects do not know the
identity of the medication they are taking, or of other elements of
their record while the trial is in progress. The research design
precludes their seeing their own records and continuing in the trial.
Thus it is appropriate for the patient to waive the right to see the
record while the trial is in progress. This understanding would be an
element of the patient's consent to participate in the trial; if the
consent signed by the patient did not include this fact, the patient
would have the normal right to see the record. In all cases, the
subject would have the right to see the record after the trial is
completed.
    As with all grounds for denial of access, denial would not be
required under these circumstances. We would expect all researchers to
maintain a high level of ethical consideration for the welfare of trial
participants and provide access where appropriate. For example, if a
participant has a severe adverse reaction, disclosure of information
during the course of the trial may be necessary to give the participant
adequate information for proper treatment decisions.
    v. Disclosure of information compiled for a legal proceeding.
    In Sec. 164.514(b)(1)(v), we are proposing that covered plans and
providers be permitted to deny a request for inspection and copying if
the information is compiled in reasonable anticipation of, or for use
in, a legal proceeding. This provision would permit the entity to deny
access to any information that relates specifically to legal
preparations but not to the individual's underlying health information.
For example, when a procedure results in an adverse outcome, a
hospital's attorney may obtain statements or other evidence from staff
about the procedure, or ask consultants to review the facts of the
situation for potential liability. Any documents containing protected
health information that are produced as a result of the attorney's
inquiries could be kept from the individual requesting access. This
provision is intended to incorporate the attorney work-product
privilege. Similar language is contained in the Privacy Act and has
been interpreted to extend beyond attorneys to information prepared by
``lay investigators.''
    We considered limiting this provision to ``civil'' legal
proceedings but determined that such a distinction could create
difficulties in implementation. In many situations, information is
gathered as a means of determining whether a civil or criminal
violation has occurred. For example, if several patients were
potentially mistreated by a member of a provider's staff, the provider
may choose to get copies of the patients' records and interview other
staff members. The provider may not know at the time they are compiling
all of this information whether any investigation, civil or criminal,
will take place. We are concerned that if we were to require the entity
to provide the individual with access to this information, we might
unreasonably interfere with this type of internal monitoring.
    c. Provision of other protected health information where access for
inspection and copying is denied. In proposed Sec. 164.514(b)(2), we
would require a covered plan or provider that elects to deny a request
for inspection or copying as provided above to make any other protected
health information requested available to the individual to the extent
possible consistent with the denial. The plan or provider could redact
or otherwise exclude only the information that falls within one or more
of the denial criteria described above and would be required to permit
inspection and copying of all remaining information. This provision is
key to the right to inspect and copy one's health information. We
intend to create narrow exceptions to the stated rule of open access
for inspection and copying and we would expect covered plans or
providers to employ these exceptions rarely, if at all. In the event
that a covered plan or provider would find it necessary to deny access,
then the denial would need to be as limited in scope as possible.
    d. Procedures to effect right of access for inspection and copying.
In Sec. 164.514(c) and (d), we are proposing that covered plans and
providers be required to have procedures that enable individuals to
exercise their rights to inspect and obtain a copy of protected health
information as explained above.

[[Page 59984]]

    We considered whether this proposed rule should include detailed
procedures governing a individual's request for inspection and copying.
Because this proposed rule will affect such a wide range of entities,
we concluded that it should only provide general guidelines and that
each entity should have the discretion to develop procedures consistent
with its own size, systems, and operations.
    i. Time limits.
    In Sec. 164.514(d)(2), we are proposing that the covered plans and
providers would take action upon the request as soon as possible but
not later than 30 days following receipt of the request. We considered
the possibility of not including a time limitation but rather imposing
a ``reasonableness'' requirement on the covered plans or providers. We
concluded that the individual is entitled to know when to expect a
response. This is particularly important in the context of health
information, where an individual may need access to his or her
information in order to make decisions about care. Therefore, in order
to determine what would be ``reasonable,'' we examined the time
limitations provided in the Privacy Act, the Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA), and several State laws.
    If the entity had fulfilled all of its duties under this proposed
rule within the required time period, then the entity should not be
penalized for any delay by the individual. For example, if, within the
30 days, a provider approves a request for inspection and copying,
makes copies of the requested information, and notifies the individual
that this information is available to be picked up and paid for at the
provider's office, then the provider's duty would be discharged under
the rule. The individual might not be able to pick up the information
for another two weeks, but this extra time should not be counted
against the provider.
    The Privacy Act requires that upon receipt of a request for
amendment (not access), the agency would send an acknowledgment to the
individual within 10 working days. (5 U.S.C. 552a (d)(2)). We
considered several options that included such an acknowledgment
requirement. An acknowledgment would be valuable because it would
assure the individual that their request was received. Despite the
potential value of requiring an acknowledgment, we concluded that it
could impose a significant administrative burden on some of the covered
plans and providers. This proposed rule will cover a wide range of
entities with varying capacities and therefore, we are reluctant to
create requirements that would overwhelm smaller entities or interfere
too much with procedures already in place. We would encourage plans and
providers to have an acknowledgment procedure in place, but would not
require it at this point. We are soliciting comment on whether this
proposed rule should require such an acknowledgment.
    We also considered whether to include specific procedures governing
``urgent'' or ``emergency'' requests. Such procedures would require
covered plans and providers to respond in a shorter time frame. We
recognize that circumstances may arise where an individual will request
inspection and copying on an expedited basis and we encourage covered
plans or providers to have procedures in place for handling such
requests. We are not proposing additional regulatory time limitations
to govern in those circumstances. The 30-day time limitation is
intended to be an outside deadline, rather than an expectation. Rather,
we would expect a plan or provider to always be attentive to the
circumstances surrounding each request and respond in an appropriate
time frame, not to exceed 30 days.
    Finally, we considered including a section governing when and how
an entity could have an extension for responding to a request for
inspection and copying. For example, the FOIA provides that an agency
may request additional time to respond to a request if the agency needs
to search for and collect the requested records from facilities that
are separate from the office processing the request; to search for,
collect, and appropriately examine a voluminous amount of separate and
distinct records; and to consult with another entity or component
having a substantial interest in the determination of the request. We
determined that the criteria established in the FOIA are tailored to
government information systems and therefore may not be appropriate for
plans and providers covered by this proposed rule. Furthermore, we
determined that the 30-day time period would be sufficient for
responding to requests for inspection and copying and that extensions
should not be necessary. We are soliciting comments on whether a
structured extension procedure should be included in this proposed
rule.
    ii. Notification of accepted requests.
    In Sec. 164.514(d)(3), we are proposing that covered plans or
providers be required to notify the individual of the decision to
provide access and of any steps necessary to fulfill the request. In
addition we propose that the entity provide the information requested
in the form or format requested if it is readily producible in such
form or format. Finally, if the covered plan or provider accepts an
individual's request, it would be required to facilitate the process of
inspection and copying.
    For example, if the plan or provider will be making copies and
sending them directly to the individual with an invoice for copying
costs, then it would need to ensure that the individual is aware of
this procedure in advance and then send the information within the 30-
day time period. If the plan or provider has procedures that require
the individual to inspect the health information on site, then in
addition to notifying the individual of the procedure, the entity would
need to ensure that there are representatives available during
reasonable business hours at the usual business address who can assist
with inspection and copying. If the plan or provider maintains health
information electronically and the individual requests an electronic
copy, the plan or provider would need to accommodate such request if
possible.
    iii. Copying fees.
    In proposed Sec. 164.514(d)(3)(iv), we would permit a covered plan
or provider to charge a reasonable, cost-based fee for copying health
information provided pursuant to this section. We considered whether we
should follow the practice in the FOIA and include a structured fee
schedule. We concluded that the FOIA was developed to reflect the
relatively uniform government costs and that this proposed rule would
apply to a broader range of entities. Depending on the size of the
entity, copying costs could vary significantly. Therefore, we propose
that the entity simply charge a reasonable, cost-based fee.
    The inclusion of a fee for copying is not intended to impede the
ability of individuals to copy their records. Rather, it is intended to
reduce the burden on covered plans and providers. When establishing a
fee for copying, we encourage covered plans and providers to consider
the impact on individuals of such a cost. If the cost is excessively
high, some individuals would not be able to obtain a copy. We would
encourage covered plans or providers to make efforts to keep the fee
for copying within reach of all individuals.
    iv. Statement of denial of access for inspection and copying.
    In Sec. 164.514(d)(4), we propose that a covered plan or provider
that denies an individual's request for inspection and copying in whole
or in part be required to provide the individual with a written
statement in plain language explaining the reason for the denial. The
statement could include a direct reference to the section of the
regulation relied upon for

[[Page 59985]]

the denial, but the regulatory citation alone would not sufficiently
explain the reason for the denial. The statement would need to include
the name and number of the contact person or office within the entity
who is responsible for receiving complaints. In addition, the statement
would need to include information regarding the submission of a
complaint with the Department pursuant to Sec. 164.522(b).
    We considered proposing that covered plans and providers provide a
mechanism for appealing a denial of inspection and copying. We believe,
however, that the requirement proposed in Sec. 164.518(d) that covered
plans and providers have complaint procedures to address patient and
enrollee privacy issues generally would allow the individual to raise
the issue of a denial with the covered plan or provider. We would
expect the complaint procedures to be scalable; for example, a large
plan might develop a standard complaint process in each location where
it operates whereas, a small practice might simply refer the original
request and denial to the clinician in charge for review. We would
encourage covered plans and providers to institute a system of appeals,
but would not require it by regulation. In addition, the individual
would be permitted to file a complaint with the Department pursuant to
Sec. 164.522(b).
3. Rights and Procedures With Respect to an Accounting of Disclosures.
(Sec. 164.515)
    [Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Accounting of disclosures'']
    a. Right to accounting of disclosures. In this rule, we propose
that individuals have a right to receive an accounting of all instances
where protected health information about them is disclosed by a covered
entity for purposes other than treatment, payment, and health care
operations, subject to certain time-limited exceptions for disclosures
to law enforcement and oversight agencies as discussed below. Providing
such an accounting would allow individuals to understand how their
health information is shared beyond the basic purposes of treatment,
payment and health care operations.
    We considered whether to require covered entities to account for
all disclosures, including those for treatment, payment and health care
operations. We rejected this approach because it would be burdensome
and because it would not focus on the disclosures of most interest to
individuals. Upon entering the health care system, individuals are
generally aware that their information will be used and shared for the
purpose of treatment, payment and health care operations. They have the
greatest interest in an accounting of circumstances where the
information was disclosed for other purposes that are less easy to
anticipate. For example, an individual might not anticipate that his or
her information would be shared with a university for a research
project, or would be requested by a law enforcement agency.
    We are not proposing that covered entities include uses and
disclosures for treatment, payment and health care operations in the
accounting. We believe that it is appropriate for covered entities to
monitor all uses and disclosures for treatment, payment and health care
operations, and they would be required to do so for electronically
maintained information by the Security Standard. However, we do not
believe that covered entities should be required to provide an
accounting of the uses and disclosures for treatment payment and health
care operations.
    The proposed Security Standard would require that ``[e]ach
organization * * * put in place audit control mechanisms to record and
examine system activity. They would be important so that the
organization can identify suspect data access activities, assess its
security program, and respond to potential weaknesses.'' The purpose of
the audit control mechanism, or audit trail, in the Security Standard
would be to provide a means for the covered entity to police access to
the protected health information maintained in its systems. By
contrast, the purpose of the accounting would be to provide a means for
individuals to know how the covered entity is disclosing protected
health information about them. An audit trail is critical to
maintaining security within the entity and it could be constructed in
such a way to enable the covered plan or provider to satisfy the
requirements of both regulations. For example, every time protected
health information was used or disclosed, the audit mechanism could
prompt the user for a ``purpose.'' If the disclosure was for a purpose
other than treatment, payment or health care operations, then the
information could be flagged or copied into a separate database. This
would allow the entity to both monitor security and have the ability to
provide an accurate accounting upon request.
    Covered entities should know how all protected health information
is used and disclosed, but should not be required to provide an
exhaustive accounting of all uses and disclosures to individuals upon
request. Such an accounting could be extremely long and detailed. It
would place a tremendous burden on the covered entities and it could be
far too detailed to adequately inform the individual. We determined
that when individuals seek health care, they understand that
information about them will be used and disclosed in order to provide
treatment or obtain payment and therefore, they would have the most
significant interest in knowing how protected health information was
used and disclosed beyond the expected realm of treatment, payment and
health care operations. We are soliciting comment on whether the scope
of accounting strikes an appropriate balance between providing
information to the individual and imposing requirements on covered
entities.
    We are proposing that covered entities be required to provide an
accounting of disclosures for as long as the entity maintains the
protected health information. We considered only requiring the
accounting for a specified period of time, but concluded that
individuals should be permitted to learn how their information was
disclosed for as long as the information is maintained by the covered
plan or provider. We are soliciting comments on whether we should
include a specific time period in this proposed rule.
    b. Procedures for providing an accounting of disclosures.
    i. Form or format.
    This proposed rule does not specify a particular form or format for
the accounting. In order to satisfy the accounting requirement, a
covered entity could elect to maintain a systematic log of disclosures
or it could elect to rely upon detailed record keeping that would
permit the entity to readily reconstruct the history when it receives a
request from an individual. We would require that covered entities be
able to respond to a request for accounting within a reasonable time
period. In developing the form or format of the accounting, covered
entities should adopt policies and procedures that will permit them to
respond to requests within the 30-day time period in this proposed
rule.
    ii. Content of the accounting of disclosures.
    We are proposing that the accounting include all disclosures for
purposes other than treatment, payment, and health care operations,
subject to certain exceptions for disclosures to law enforcement and
oversight agencies, discussed below. This would also include
disclosures that are authorized by the individual. The accounting would
include the date of each disclosure; the name and address of the

[[Page 59986]]

organization or person who received the protected health information;
and a brief description of the information disclosed. For all
disclosures that are authorized by the individual, we are proposing
that the covered entity maintain a copy of the authorization form and
make it available to the individual with the accounting.
    We considered whether the accounting of disclosures should include
the name of the person who authorized the disclosure of information.
The proposed Security Standard would require covered entities to have
an audit mechanism in place to monitor access by employees. We
concluded that it was unnecessary and inappropriate to require the
covered entity to include this additional information in the
accounting. If the individual identifies an improper disclosure by an
entity, he or she should hold the entit--not the employee of the
entity--accountable. It is the responsibility of the entity to train
its workforce about its policies and procedures for the disclosure of
protected health information and to impose sanctions if such policies
and procedures are violated.
    We are proposing that protected health information that is
disclosed to a health oversight or law enforcement agency would be
excluded from the accounting if the oversight or law enforcement agency
provides a written request stating that the exclusion is necessary for
a specified time period because access by the individual during that
time period would be reasonably likely to impede the agency's
activities. The written request must specifically state how long the
information should be excluded. At the expiration of that period, the
covered entity would be required to include the information in an
accounting for the individual.
    We are proposing this time-limited exclusion for law enforcement
and oversight activities because we do not intend to unreasonably
interfere with investigations and other activities that are in the
public interest. The Recommendations simply provide that disclosures to
law enforcement and oversight agencies should be excluded from the
accounting where access by the individual could be reasonably likely to
impede the agency's activities. We were concerned that it would be
difficult for covered entities to determine whether access by the
individual was ``reasonably likely to impede the agency's activities.''
In order to address this concern, we considered excluding all
disclosures to law enforcement and oversight from the accounting, but
concluded that such an exclusion would be overly broad. As a means of
creating a clearly defined rule for the covered entity to follow, we
are proposing that covered entities require a time-limited, written
statement from the oversight or law enforcement agency. We are
soliciting comment on whether this time-limited exclusion strikes the
appropriate balance between ensuring individual access to an accounting
of disclosures and preserving the integrity of law enforcement and
oversight investigations.
    iii. Time limits.
    We are proposing that the accounting of disclosures, including
copies of signed authorization forms, be made available to the
individual as quickly as the circumstances require, but not later than
30 days following receipt of the request.
4. Rights and Procedures for Amendment and Correction (Sec. 164.516)
[Please label comments about this section with the subject: ``Amendment
or correction'']
    a. Right to request amendment or correction of protected health
information. This proposed rule would provide an individual with the
right to request a covered plan or provider to amend or correct
protected health information relating to the individual. A covered plan
or provider would be required to accommodate requests with respect to
any information that the covered plan or provider determines to be
erroneous or incomplete, that was created by the plan or provider, and
that would be available for inspection and copying under proposed
Sec. 164.514.
    i. Accuracy and completeness.
    The first criteria that a covered entity would need to consider is
whether the protected health information at issue is either erroneous
or incomplete. The basic concept comes from the Privacy Act of 1974,
governing records held by Federal agencies, which permits an individual
to request correction or amendment of a record ``which the individual
believes is not accurate, relevant, timely, or complete.'' (5 U.S.C.
552a(d)(2)). We would adopt the standards of ``accuracy'' and
``completeness'' and draw on the clarification and analysis of these
terms that has emerged in administrative and judicial interpretations
of the Privacy Act over the last 25 years.
    We are not proposing to permit correction on the basis of an
individual's belief that information is irrelevant or untimely. The
Privacy Act of 1974 imposes affirmative obligations on Federal agencies
to maintain records with accuracy, relevance, timeliness, and
completeness, and permits individuals to seek correction of records
that do not meet that standard. The amendment and correction right
complements and helps to enforce the agency obligation.
    Our view is that the relevance and timeliness standards, while very
appropriate for Federal agencies generally, would be difficult to
impose by regulation upon health record keeping, which depends to a
large extent on clinical judgment. The increasingly-recognized impact
of lifestyle and environmental factors on health may, for example,
motivate physicians to record information which appears irrelevant, but
which may in fact serve as a diagnostic clue, or which may alert later
users of the record to clinically relevant aspects of the patient's
life. We invite comment on how any such standard might be structured to
avoid interfering inappropriately with clinical judgment.
    We also are concerned about the burden that requests for amendment
or correction may place on covered plans and providers and have tried
to limit the process to those situations where amendment or correction
would appear to be most important. We invite comment on whether our
approach reasonably balances burden with adequately protecting
individual interests.
    We note that for Federal agencies that are also covered plans or
providers, the rule we are proposing would not diminish their present
obligations under the Privacy Act of 1974, under which all four factors
are bases for amendment and correction.
    ii. Original creator of the information.
    We propose to require a covered plan or provider to accommodate a
request for amendment or correction if the plan or provider created the
information in dispute.
    We considered requiring covered plans and providers to amend or
correct any erroneous or incomplete information it maintains,
regardless of whether it created the information. Under this approach,
if the plan or provider did not create the information, then it would
have been required to trace the information back to the original source
to determine accuracy and completeness. We rejected this option because
we concluded that it would not be appropriate to require the plan or
provider that receives a request to be responsible for verifying the
accuracy or completeness of information that it did not create. We also
were concerned about the burden that would be imposed on covered plans
and providers if they were required to trace the source of any
erroneous or

[[Page 59987]]

incomplete information transmitted to them.
    We would rely on a combination of three other requirements to
ensure that protected health information remains as accurate as
possible as it travels through the health care system. First, we are
proposing that a covered plan or provider that makes an amendment or
correction be required to notify any relevant persons, organizations,
or other entities of the change or addition. Second, we are proposing
that other covered plans or providers that receive such a notification
be required to incorporate the necessary amendment or correction.
Finally, we are proposing that covered plans or providers require their
business partners who receive such notifications to incorporate any
necessary amendments or corrections. See discussion in section
II.F.4.c.iii. We are soliciting comments whether this approach would
effectively ensure that amendments and corrections are communicated
appropriately.
    iii. Information available for amendment or correction.
    We are proposing that the right to request amendment or correction
extend to all protected health information that would be available for
inspection and copying under Sec. 164.514. We would only require
covered plans and providers to amend or correct that information
maintained in a designated record set but would encourage the
development of systems that would accommodate these types of changes
for all data collections. For protected health information that is
maintained solely by a business partner or that has been materially
altered by a business partner, the covered plan or provider would need
to make arrangements with the business partner to accommodate any
requests.
    This right would not be intended to interfere with medical
practice, or modify standard business record keeping practices. Perfect
records are not required, but instead a standard of reasonable accuracy
and completeness should be used. In addition, this right would not be
intended to provide a procedure for substantive review of decisions
such as coverage determinations by payers. It would only affect the
content of records, not the underlying truth or correctness of
materials recounted therein. Attempts under the Privacy Act of 1974 to
use this correction mechanism as a basis for collateral attack on
agency determinations have generally been rejected by the courts. The
same results would be intended here.
    iv. Duration of the right to request amendment or correction.
    We are proposing that covered plans and providers be required to
accommodate requests for amendment or correction for as long as the
entity maintains the protected health information. We considered
requiring covered plans and providers to accommodate requests for a
specific period or defining a specific retention period. We rejected
that approach because many laws and professional standards already
designate specific retention periods and we did not want to create
confusion. In addition, we concluded that individuals should be
permitted to request amendments or corrections for as long as the
information is maintained by the covered plan or provider. We are
soliciting comments on whether we should include a specific duration
requirement in this proposed rule.
    b. Grounds for denial of request for amendment or correction. We
are proposing that a covered plan or provider would be permitted to
deny a request for amendment or correction if, after a reasonable
review, the plan or provider determines that it did not create the
information at issue, the information would not be available for
inspection and copying under proposed Sec. 164.514, the information is
accurate and complete, or if it is erroneous or incomplete, it would
not adversely affect the individual.
    c. Procedures for requesting amendment or correction.
    i. Individual requests for amendment or correction.
    In Sec. 164.516, we are proposing that covered plans and providers
be required to have procedures that enable individuals to exercise
their rights to request amendment or correction, including a means by
which individuals can request amendment or correction of protected
health information about them. We considered whether this proposed rule
should include detailed procedures governing an individual's request.
But as with the procedures for requesting inspection and copying, we
are only providing a general requirement and permitting each plan or
provider to develop procedures in accordance with its needs. Once the
procedures are developed, the plan or provider would document them in
accordance with section Sec. 164.520 and include a brief explanation in
the notice that is provided to individuals pursuant to section
Sec. 164.512.
    ii. Time limits.
    We are proposing that the covered plan or provider would take
action on a request for amendment or correction as quickly as the
circumstances require, but not later than 60 days following the
request. The justification for establishing a time limitation for
amendment and correction is virtually identical to that provided for
the time limitation for inspection and copying. We concluded that the
entity should be provided with some additional flexibility in this
context. Depending on the nature of the request, an amendment or
correction could require significantly more time than a request for
inspection and copying. If a covered plan or provider needed more than
30 days to make a decision, we would encourage, but not require, it to
send an acknowledgment of receipt to the individual including an
explanation of the reasons for the delay and a date when the individual
can expect a final decision.
    iii. Acceptance of a request for amendment or correction.
    If a covered plan or provider accepts an individual's request for
amendment or correction, it would be required to make the appropriate
amendments or corrections. In making the change, the entity would have
to either add the amended or corrected information as a permanent part
of the record or mark the challenged entries as amended or corrected
entries and, if appropriate, indicate the place in the record where the
amended or corrected information is located. Covered plans or providers
would not be required to expunge any protected health information, but
rather mark it as erroneous or incomplete.
    We also propose in Sec. 164.506(e) that entities include a contract
requirement that when the covered plan or provider notifies the
business partner of an amendment or correction, the business partner
must make the necessary amendments or corrections to protected health
information in its custody.
    In Sec. 164.516(c)(3), we are proposing that, upon accepting an
amendment or correction, the covered plan or provider would be required
to make reasonable efforts to notify relevant persons, organizations,
or other entities of the change or addition. An entity would be
required to notify such persons that the individual identifies, or that
the covered plan or provider identifies as (1) a recipient of the
erroneous or incomplete information, and (2) a person who:
    <bullet> Has relied upon that information to the detriment of the
individual; or
    <bullet> Is a person who may foreseeably rely on such erroneous or
incomplete information to the detriment of the individual.
    We are concerned about the potential burden that this notification
requirement would impose on covered plans and providers. We do not,
however, anticipate that a significant

[[Page 59988]]

number of requests would be submitted to any entity and therefore the
need for such notifications would be rare. In addition, we determined
that because health information can travel so quickly and efficiently
in the modern health care system, the need for notification outweighed
the potential burden. It is important to note that a reasonableness
standard should be applied to the notification process--if the
recipient has not relied upon the erroneous or incomplete information
to the detriment of the individual or if it is not foreseeable that the
recipient will do so, then it would not be reasonable for the covered
plan or provider to incur the time and expense of notification. If,
however, the incorrect information is reasonably likely to be used to
the detriment of the individual, the entity should make every effort to
notify the recipients of the information of the changes as quickly as
possible.
    iv. Denial of a request for amendment or correction.
    In proposed Sec. 164.516(c)(4), we would require a covered plan or
provider to provide the individual with a written statement in plain
language of the reason for the denial and permit the individual to file
a written statement of disagreement with the decision to deny the
request.
    The statement prepared by covered plan or provider would be
required to explain the basis for the denial. The statement would
include a description of how the individual may complain to the covered
plan or provider as provided in Sec. 164.518(d). The statement would
include the name and number of the contact person within the plan or
provider who is responsible for receiving complaints. The statement
also would include information regarding filing a complaint with the
Secretary pursuant to Sec. 164.522(b)(1), including the mailing address
and any forms that may be available. Finally, the statement would
explain that the individual has the right to file a written statement
of disagreement that would be maintained with the disputed information
and the procedure for filing such a statement of disagreement.
    If the individual chooses to file a statement of disagreement, then
the covered plan or provider must retain a copy of the statement with
the protected health information in dispute. The covered plan or
provider could require that the statement be a reasonable length,
provided that the individual has reasonable opportunity to state the
nature of the disagreement and offer his or her version of accurate and
complete information. In all subsequent disclosures of the information
requested to be amended or corrected, the covered plan or provider
would be required to include a copy of its statement of the basis for
denial and, if provided by the individual, a copy of his or her
statement of disagreement. If the statement submitted by the individual
is unreasonably long, the covered plan or provider could include a
summary in subsequent disclosures which reasonably explains the basis
of the individual's position. The covered plan or provider would also
be permitted to provide a rebuttal to the individual's statement of
disagreement and include the rebuttal statement in any subsequent
disclosures.
    We considered requiring the covered plan or provider to provide a
mechanism for appealing denials of amendment or correction but
concluded that it would be too burdensome. We are soliciting comment on
whether the approach we have adopted reasonably balances the burdens on
covered plans or providers with the rights of individuals.
    v. Receipt of a notification of amendment or correction.
    If a covered plan or provider receives a notification of erroneous
or incomplete protected health information as provided in proposed
Sec. 164.516(d), we are proposing that the covered plan or provider or
be required to make the necessary amendment or correction to protected
health information in its custody that would be available for
inspection and copying. This affirmative duty to incorporate amendments
and corrections would be necessary to ensure that individuals'
protected health information is as accurate and complete as possible as
it travels through the health care system.

G. Administrative Requirements  (Sec. 164.518)

[Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Introduction to administrative requirements'']
    In Sec. 164.518, we are proposing general administrative
requirements for covered entities. We would require all covered
entities to designate a privacy official, train members of their
workforce regarding privacy requirements, safeguard protected health
information, and establish sanctions for members of the workforce who
do not abide by the entity's privacy policies and procedures. In
addition, we are proposing that covered plans and providers be required
to establish a means for individuals to complain to the covered plan or
provider if they believe that their privacy rights have been violated.
In the discussions of each proposed provision, we provide examples of
how different kinds of covered entities could satisfy these
requirements.
1. Designation of a Privacy Official  (Sec. 164.518(a))
[Please label comments about this section with the subject: ``Privacy
official'']
    In proposed Sec. 164.518(a)(1), we would require covered entities
to designate an employee or other person to serve as the official
responsible for the development of policies and procedures for the use
and disclosure of protected health information. The designation of an
official would focus the responsibility for development of privacy
policy.
    We considered whether covered entities should be required to
designate a single official or an entire board. We concluded that a
single official would better serve the purposes of focusing the
responsibility and providing accountability within the entity. The
implementation of this requirement would depend on the size of the
entity. For example, a small physician's practice might designate the
office manager as the privacy official, and he or she would assume this
as one of his or her broader administrative responsibilities. A large
entity might appoint a person whose sole responsibility is privacy
policy, and he or she might choose to convene a committee representing
several different components of the entity to develop and implement
privacy policy.
    In proposed Sec. 164.518(a)(2), we would require a covered entity
to designate a contact person or office to receive complaints and
provide information about the matters covered by the entity's notice.
The covered entity could, but would not be required to, designate the
designated privacy official as the entity's contact person.
    In proposed Sec. 164.512, we would require the covered plan or
provider's privacy notice to include the name of a contact person for
privacy matters. We would not require that the contact person and the
designated privacy official be the same person. This would be left to
the discretion of each covered entity.
2. Training  (Sec. 164.518(b))
[Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Training'']
    In proposed Sec. 164.518(b), we would require covered entities to
provide training on the entities policies and procedures with respect
to protected health information. Each entity would be required to
provide initial training by the date on which this proposed rule
becomes applicable. After that date, each covered entity would have to

[[Page 59989]]

provide training to new members of the workforce within a reasonable
time period after joining the entity. In addition, we are proposing
that when a covered entity makes material changes in its privacy
policies or procedures, it would be required to retrain those members
of the workforce whose duties are directly affected by the change
within a reasonable time of making the change.
    The entities would be required to train all members of the
workforce (e.g., all employees, volunteers, trainees, and other persons
under the direct control of a persons working on behalf of the covered
entity on an unpaid basis who are not business partners) who are likely
to have contact with protected health information.
    Upon completion of the training, the person would be required to
sign a statement certifying that he or she received the privacy
training and will honor all of the entity's privacy policies and
procedures. Entities would determine the most effective means of
communicating with their workforce. For example, in a small physician
practice, the training requirement could be satisfied by providing each
new member of the workforce with a copy of the practice's information
policies and requiring members of the workforce to acknowledge that
they have reviewed the policies. A large health plan could provide for
a training program with live instruction, video presentations or
interactive software programs. The small physician practice's solution
would not protect the large plan's data, and the plan's solution would
be neither economically feasible nor necessary for the small physician
practice.
    At least once every three years after the initial training, covered
entities would be required to have each member of the workforce sign a
new statement certifying that he or she will honor all of the entity's
privacy policies and procedures. The initial certification would be
intended to make members of the workforce aware of their duty to adhere
to the entity's policies and procedures. By requiring a recertification
every three years, they would be reminded of this duty.
    We considered several different options for recertification. We
considered proposing that members of the workforce be required to
recertify every six months, but concluded that such a requirement would
be too burdensome. We considered proposing that recertification be
required annually consistent with the recommendations of The American
Health Information Management Association (Brandt, Mary D., Release and
Disclosure: Guidelines Regarding Maintenance and Disclosure of Health
Information, 1997). We concluded that annual recertification could also
impose a significant burden on covered entities.
    We also considered requiring that the covered entity provide
``refresher'' training every three years in addition to the
recertification. We concluded that our goals could be achieved by only
requiring recertification once every three years, and retraining in the
event of material changes in policy. We are soliciting comment on this
approach.
3. Safeguards  (Sec. 164.518(c))
[Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Safeguards'']
    In proposed Sec. 164.518(c), we would require covered entities to
put in place administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to
protect against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the
privacy of the information, and unauthorized uses or disclosures of the
information. We proposed similar requirements for certain electronic
information in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking entitled the Security
and Electronic Signature Standards (HCFA-0049-P), which can be found at
63 FR 43241. We are proposing parallel and consistent requirements for
safeguarding the privacy of protected health information.
    a. Verification procedures. As noted in section II.E. above, for
many permitted disclosures the covered entity would be responding to a
request for disclosure of protected health information. For most
categories of permitted disclosures, when the request for disclosure of
protected health information is from a person with whom the covered
entity does not routinely do business, we would require the covered
entity to verify the identity of the requestor. In addition, for
certain categories of disclosures, covered entities would also be
required to verify the requestor's legal authority to make the request.
    Under Sec. 164.514, a covered entity would be required to give
individuals access to protected health information about them (under
most circumstances). The covered entity would also be required to take
reasonable steps to verify the identity of the individual making the
request for access. We do not propose to mandate particular
identification requirements (e.g., drivers licence, photo ID, etc), but
rather would leave this to the discretion of the covered entity.
    Covered entities would be required to verify both the identity of
persons requesting protected health information and their authority for
requesting such information when the request is from a person with whom
the covered entity does not routinely do business and the disclosure
would be permitted by the following subsections of Sec. 164.510: under
Sec. 164.510(b) for public health, under Sec. 164.510(c) for oversight,
under Sec. 164.510(e) to coroners and medical examiners, under
Sec. 164.510(f) for law enforcement, under Sec. 164.510(g) for
governmental health data systems, under Sec. 164.510(m) for special
classes, and for disclosures required by other laws under
Sec. 164.510(n). Covered entities would be required to verify the
identity of the requester by examination of reasonable evidence, such
as a written statement of identity on agency letterhead, an
identification badge, or similar proof of official status. Similarly,
covered entities would be required to verify the legal authority
supporting the request by examination of reasonable evidence, such as a
written request provided on agency letterhead that describes the legal
authority for requesting the release. Unless Sec. 164.510 explicitly
requires written evidence of legal process or other authority before a
disclosure may be made, a public official's proof of identity and the
official's oral statement that the request is authorized by law would
be presumed to constitute the required reasonable evidence of legal
authority. Where Sec. 164.510 does require written evidence of legal
process or authority, only the required written evidence will suffice.
    We considered specifying the type of documentation or proof that
would be acceptable, but decided that the burden of such specific
regulatory requirements on covered entities would be unnecessary.
Therefore, we propose only a general requirement for reasonable
verification of identity and legal authority.
    In Sec. 164.522, we would require disclosure to the Secretary for
purposes of enforcing this regulation. When a covered entity is asked
by the Secretary to disclose protected health information for
compliance purposes, the covered entity should verify the same
information that it would verify for any other law enforcement or
oversight request for disclosure.
    In some circumstances a person or entity acting on behalf of a
government agency may make a request for disclosure of protected health
information under these subsections. For example, public health
agencies may contract with a nonprofit agency to collect and analyze
certain data. In such cases the covered entity would be required to
verify the requestor's identity and authority through

[[Page 59990]]

examination of reasonable documentation that the requestor is acting on
behalf of the government agency. Reasonable evidence would include a
written request provided on agency letterhead that describes the legal
authority for requesting the release and states that the person or
entity is acting under the agency's authority, or other documentation,
including a contract, a memorandum of understanding, or purchase order
that confirms that the requestor is acting on behalf of the government
agency.
    For disclosures permitted under Sec. 164.510(k) for emergency
circumstances and under Sec. 164.510(l) to next-of-kin, legal authority
for the request would not be an issue. Therefore covered entities would
only be required to verify the identity of the person requesting the
disclosure. Where protected health information is requested by next-of-
kin, covered entities would be required to make reasonable verbal
attempts to establish the identity of the person making the request.
Written proof would not be required. Covered entities could rely on
prior acquaintance with the next-of-kin; verbal verification of
identity would not be required at each encounter. Where protected
health information is requested in an emergency, the covered entity
would similarly not be required to demand written proof that the person
requesting the protected health information is legally authorized.
Reasonable reliance on verbal representations would be appropriate in
such situations.
    When another person is acting as the individual through power of
attorney or other legal authority, covered entities would also be
required to make reasonable attempts to ascertain that the person
making the request has the necessary legal authority or relationship in
order to make the disclosure. For example, a health care provider could
require a copy of a power of attorney, or could ask questions to
determine that an adult acting for a young child has the requisite
relationship to the child.
    Most disclosures under Sec. 164.510(i) are routine transactions
with banking and other financial institutions. As noted above, for
routine transactions there would be no verification requirements.
However, should such financial institution make a special request for
information in addition to the information routinely provided for
payment purposes (e.g., pursuant to a fraud or similar investigation),
the covered entity would be required to obtain reasonable evidence of
the identity of the person requesting the information.
    The conditions for disclosures for judicial and administrative
proceedings and research are discussed in Sec. 164.510 (d) and
Sec. 164.510(j), respectively. Conditions for permitted disclosures
under Sec. 164.510(h) for facility directories include no verification
requirements.
    b. Whistleblowers. In Section Sec. 164.518(c)(4), we would address
the issue of disclosures by employees or others of protected health
information in whistleblower cases. We would clarify that under the
proposed rule, a covered entity would not be held in violation because
a member of their workforce or a person associated with a business
partner of the covered entity discloses protected health information
that such person believes is evidence of a civil or criminal violation,
and the disclosure is: (1) Made to relevant oversight agencies and law
enforcement or (2) made to an attorney to allow the attorney to
determine whether a violation of criminal or civil law has occurred or
to assess the remedies or actions at law that may be available to the
person disclosing the information.
    Allegations of civil and criminal wrongdoing come from a variety of
sources. Sometimes an individual not otherwise involved in law
enforcement uncovers evidence of wrongdoing, and wishes to bring that
evidence to the attention of appropriate authorities. Persons with
access to protected health information sometimes discover evidence of
billing fraud or similar violations; important evidence of unlawful
activities may be available to employees of covered entities, such as
billing clerks or nurses.
    Some whistleblower activities can be accomplished without
individually identifiable health information. There are, however,
instances in which only identifiable information will suffice to
demonstrate that an allegation of wrongdoing merits the investment of
legal or investigatory resources. A billing clerk who suspects that a
hospital has engaged in fraudulent billing practices may need to use
billing records for a set of specific cases to demonstrate the basis of
his suspicion to an oversight agency.
    The persons who find such evidence are likely to be employees of
the suspect entity. Congress and the states have recognized the
importance of whistleblowing activities by acting to protect
whistleblowers from retaliation. Federal statutes that include
protections for whistleblowers who contact appropriate authorities
include the Clear Air Act, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Safe Drinking Water Act. Congress
also passed the Whistleblower Protection Act, to protect federal
employees who complain about improper personnel practices at federal
agencies. At least eleven states have passed whistleblower protection
laws that protect both private and public employees who provide
evidence of wrongdoing to the appropriate authorities, and many more
states have laws that provide such protections only for public
employees.
    The qui tam provisions of the Federal False Claims Act go further,
and provide a mechanism for the individual to prosecute a case against
a person who has allegedly defrauded the government. Like traditional
whistleblower actions, qui tam actions were created by the Congress to
further the public interest in effective government. Qui tam suits are
an important way that individuals can protect the public interest, by
investing their own time and resources to help reduce fraud. And, also
like whistleblower actions, the individual may need protected health
information to convince an attorney that a viable qui tam case exists.
    We would note that this section would not apply to information
requested by oversight agencies, law enforcement officials, or
attorneys, even prior to initiation of an investigation or law suit. It
would apply only to a disclosure initiated by a member of an entity's
workforce or a person associated with one of its business partners.
    We are concerned that a person, in the guise of ``whistleblowing,''
might, maliciously or otherwise, disclose protected health information
without any actual basis to believe that there has been a violation of
the law. We are concerned, however, with adding qualifying language
that may restrict such disclosures and, therefore, impede the pursuit
of law violators. We seek comments regarding whether this provision
should include any limitations (e.g., a requirement that only the
minimum amount of information necessary for these purposes can be
disclosed).
4. Internal Complaint Process  (Sec. 164.518(d))
    In proposed Sec. 164.518(d), we would require covered plans and
providers to have some mechanism for receiving complaints from
individuals regarding the covered plan's or provider's compliance with
the requirements of this proposed rule. The covered plan or provider
would be required to accept complaints about any aspect of their
practices regarding protected health information. For example,
individuals would be able to file a complaint when

[[Page 59991]]

they believe that protected health information relating to them has
been used or disclosed improperly, that an employee of the plan or
provider has improperly handled the information, that they have
wrongfully been denied access to or opportunity to amend the
information, or that the entity's notice does not accurately reflect
its information practices. We would not require that the entity develop
a formal appeals mechanism, nor that ``due process'' or any similar
standard be applied. We would not require that covered entities respond
in any particular manner or time frame. We are proposing two basic
requirements for the complaint process. First, the covered plan or
provider would be required to identify a contact person or office in
the notice of information practices for receiving complaints. This
person or office could either be responsible for handling the
complaints or could put the individual in touch with the appropriate
person within the entity to handle the particular complaint. See
proposed Sec. 164.512. This person could, but would not have to be, the
entity's privacy official. See Sec. 164.518(a)(2). Second, the covered
plan or provider would be required to maintain a record of the
complaints that are filed and a brief explanation of the resolution, if
any.
    Covered plans and providers could implement this requirement
through a variety of mechanisms based on their size and capabilities.
For example, a small practice could assign a clerk to log in written
and/or verbal complaints as they are received, and assign one physician
to review all complaints monthly, address the individual situations and
make changes to policies or procedures as appropriate. Results of the
physician's review of individual complaints then could be logged by the
clerk. A larger provider or health plan could choose to implement a
formal appeals process with standardized time frames for response.
    We considered requiring covered plans and providers to provide a
formal internal appeal mechanism, but rejected that option as too
costly and burdensome for some entities. We also considered eliminating
this requirement entirely, but rejected that option because a complaint
process would give covered plans or providers a way to learn about
potential problems with privacy policies or practices, or training
issues. We also hope that providing an avenue for covered plans or
providers to address complaints would lead to increased consumer
satisfaction. We believe this approach strikes a reasonable balance
between allowing covered plans or providers flexibility and
accomplishing the goal of promoting attention to improvement in privacy
practices. If an individual and a covered plan or provider are able to
resolve the individual's complaint, there may be no need for the
individual to file a complaint with the Secretary under proposed
Sec. 164.522(b). However, an individual has the right to file a
complaint with the Secretary at any time. An individual may file a
complaint with the Secretary before, during, after, or concurrent with
filing a compliant with the covered plan or provider or without filing
a complaint with the covered plan or provider.
    We are considering whether modifications of these complaint
procedures for intelligence community agencies may be necessary to
address the handling of classified information and solicit comment on
the issue.
5. Sanctions  (Sec. 164.518(e))
[Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Sanctions'']
    In proposed Sec. 164.518(e), we would require all covered entities
to develop and apply when appropriate sanctions for failure to comply
with policies or procedures of the covered entity or with the
requirements of this proposed rule. All members of the workforce who
have regular contact with protected health information should be
subject to sanctions, as would the entity's business partners. Covered
entities would be required to develop and impose sanctions appropriate
to the nature of the issue. The type of sanction applied would vary
depending on factors such as the severity of the violation, whether the
violation was intentional or unintentional, and whether the violation
indicates a pattern or practice of improper use or disclosure of
protected health information. Sanctions could range from a warning to
termination.
    We considered specifying particular sanctions for particular kinds
of violations of privacy policy, but rejected this approach for several
reasons. First, the appropriate sanction will vary with the entity's
particular policies. Because we cannot anticipate every kind of privacy
policy in advance, we cannot predict the response that would be
appropriate when that policy is violated. In addition, it is important
to allow covered entities to develop the sanctions policies appropriate
to their business and operations.
6. Duty To Mitigate  (Sec. 164.518(f))
[Please label comments about this section with the subject: ``Duty to
mitigate'']
    We propose that covered entities be required to have procedures for
mitigating, to the extent practicable, any deleterious effect of a use
or disclosure of protected health information by their members of their
workforce or business partners.
    With respect to business partners, we also propose that covered
entities have an affirmative duty to take reasonable steps in response
to breaches of contract terms. For example, a covered entity that
becomes aware that a business partner has improperly disclosed
protected health information could require that business partner to
take steps to retrieve the disclosed information. The covered entity
also could require that business partner to adopt new practices to
better assure that protected health information is appropriately
handled. Covered entities generally would not be required to monitor
the activities of their business partners, but would be required to
take steps to address problems of which they become aware, and, where
the breach is serious or repeated, would also be required to monitor
the business partner's performance to ensure that the wrongful behavior
has been remedied. For example, the covered entity could require the
business partner to submit reports or subject itself to audits to
demonstrate compliance with the contract terms required by this rule.
Termination of the arrangement would be required only if it becomes
clear that a business partner cannot be relied upon to maintain the
privacy of protected health information provided to it.
    We expect that sanctions would be more formally described and
consistently carried out in larger, more sophisticated entities.
Smaller, less sophisticated entities would be given more latitude and
flexibility. For such smaller entities and less sophisticated entities,
we would not expect a prescribed sanctions policy, but would expect
that actions be taken if repeated instances of violations occur.

H. Development and Documentation of Policies and Procedures
(Sec. 164.520)

[Please label comments about this section with the subject: ``Policies
and procedures'']
    In proposed Sec. 164.520, we would require covered entities to
develop and document their policies and procedures for implementing the
requirements of this rule. This requirement is intended as a tool to
facilitate covered entities' efforts to develop appropriate policies to
implement this rule, to ensure that the members of its workforce and
business partners understand and carry out expected privacy practices,
and to assist

[[Page 59992]]

covered entities in developing a notice of information practices.
    The scale of the policies developed should be consistent with the
size of the covered entity. For example, a smaller employer could
develop policies restricting access to health plan information to one
designated employee, empowering that employee to deny release of the
information to corporate executives and managers unless required for
health plan administration. Larger employers could have policies that
include using contractors for any function that requires access to
protected health information or requiring all reports they receive for
plan administration to be de-identified unless individual authorization
is obtained.
    Clearly, implementation of these requirements would differ
significantly based on the size, capabilities and activities of each
covered entity. A solo practitioner's documentation of her policies and
procedures could provide relatively straightforward statements, such
as:

    This practice does not use or disclose any protected health
information that is not authorized or permitted under the federal
privacy regulation and therefore does not request any authorized
disclosures from patients. Staff R.N. reviews all individually
authorized requests for disclosures to ensure they contain all
required elements and reviews the copied information to ensure only
authorized information is released in response. Information requests
that would require extensive redaction will be denied.

    Larger entities with many functions and business relationships and
who are subject to multi-state reporting and record-keeping
requirements would need to develop and document more extensive
policies. A health plan would need to describe all activities that
would be considered health care operations and identify the use and
disclosure requirements of each activity. A health plan may determine
that underwriting department employees must provide a written request,
approved by a team leader, to access any identifiable claims
information; that such requests must be retained and reviewed every
quarter for appropriateness; and the underwriting department must
destroy such information after use for an approved activity. We urge
professional associations to develop model policies, procedures and
documentation for their members of all sizes.
    We are proposing general guidelines for covered entities to develop
and document their own policies and procedures. We considered a more
uniform, prescriptive approach but concluded that a single approach
would be neither effective in safeguarding protected health information
nor appropriate given the vast differences among covered entities in
size, business practices and level of sophistication. It is important
that each covered entity's internal policies and procedures for
implementing the requirements of this regulation are tailored to the
nature and number of its business arrangements, the size of its patient
population, its physical plant and computer system, the size and
characteristics of its workforce, whether it has one or many locations,
and similar factors. The internal policies and procedures appropriate
for a clearinghouse would not be appropriate for a physician practice;
the internal policies and procedures appropriate for a large, multi-
state health plan would not be appropriate for a smaller, local health
plan.
    After evaluating the requirements of federal, State, or other
applicable laws, covered entities should develop policies and
procedures that are appropriate for their size, type, structure, and
business arrangements. Once a covered plan or provider has developed
and documented all of the policies and procedures as required in this
section, it would have compiled all of the information needed to
develop the notice of information practices required in Sec. 164.512.
The notice is intended to include a clear and concise summary of many
of the policies and procedures discussed in this section. Further, if
an individual has any questions about the entity's privacy policies
that are not addressed by the notice, a representative of the entity
can easily refer to the documented policies and procedures for
additional information.
    Before making a material change in a policy or procedure, the
covered entity would, in most instances, be required to make the
appropriate changes to the documentation required by this section
before implementing the change. In addition, covered plans and
providers would be required to revise the notice of information
practices in advance. Where the covered entity determines that a
compelling reason exists to take an action that is inconsistent with
its documentation or notice before making the necessary changes, it may
take such action if it documents the reasons supporting the action and
makes the necessary changes within 30 days of taking such action.
    In an attempt to ensure that large entities develop coordinated and
comprehensive policies and procedures as required by this section, we
considered proposing that entities with annual receipts greater than $5
million <SUP>5</SUP> be required to have a privacy board review and
approve the documentation of policies and procedures. As originally
conceived, the privacy board would only serve to review research
protocols as described in Sec. 164.510(j). We believe that such a board
could also serve as ``privacy experts'' for the covered entity and
could review the entity's documented policies and procedures. In this
capacity, the overriding objective of the board would be to foster
development of up-to-date, individualized policies that enable the
organization to protect health information without unnecessarily
interfering with the treatment and payment functions or business needs.
This type of review is particularly important for large entities who
would have to coordinate policies and procedures among a large staff,
but smaller organizations would be encouraged, but not required, to
take a similar approach (i.e., have a widely representative group
participate in the development and/or review of the organization's
internal privacy policies and the documentation thereof). We solicit
comment on this proposal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \5\ The Small Business Administration defines small businesses
in the health care field as those generating less than $5 million
annually. Small businesses represent approximately 85% of health
care entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    We also considered requiring the covered entity to make its
documentation available to persons outside the entity upon request. We
rejected this approach because covered entities should not be required
to share their operating procedures with the public, or with their
competitors.
    We recognize that the documentation requirement in this proposed
rule would impose some paperwork burden on covered plans and providers.
However, we believe that it is necessary to ensure that covered plans
and providers establish privacy policies procedures in advance of any
requests for disclosure, authorization, or subject access. It is also
necessary to ensure that covered entities and members of their
workforce have a clear understanding of the permissible uses and
disclosures of protected health information and their duty to protect
the privacy of such information under specific circumstances.
1. Uses and Disclosures of Protected Health Information
    We propose that covered entities be required to develop and
document policies and procedures for how protected health information
would be used and disclosed by the entity and its

[[Page 59993]]

business partners. The documentation would include policies to ensure
the entity is in compliance with the requirements for use and
disclosure pursuant to an individual's authorization. This would also
include documentation of how the covered entity would comply with
individual's revocation of an authorization, as provided in proposed
Sec. 164.508(e). For example, upon receipt of a revocation, the entity
may need to take steps to notify each business partner that is
responsible for using or disclosing protected health information on
behalf of the covered entity based on the individual's authorization.
Because the entity is ultimately responsible for the protected health
information, it may want written confirmation from the business partner
that it received notice of the revocation.
    The covered entity would be required to include policies and
procedures necessary to address disclosures required by applicable law.
For example, the covered entity may want to include a list of the
relevant reporting requirements such as those for abuse, neglect and
communicable disease and its policies and procedures for complying with
each requirement.
    It would also include policies and procedures for uses and
disclosures without the individual's authorization, including uses and
disclosures for treatment, payment and health care operations under
Sec. 164.506(a)(1)(i). The documentation should address all of the
legally permissible uses and disclosures that the covered entity is
reasonably likely to make and should clearly specify the policy of the
entity with respect to each. For example, all covered plans and
providers face a reasonable likelihood of a request for disclosure from
a health oversight agency, so every covered plan and provider should
develop and document policies and procedures for responding to such
requests. However, a provider that only treats adults would not need to
specify a policy with respect to state laws that authorize disclosure
relating to measles in young children. In this latter case, the
provider knows that he or she is not reasonably likely to make such a
disclosure and therefore, could wait until he or she is presented with
such a request before developing the necessary policies and procedures.
    The documentation would include the entity's policies and procedure
for complying with the requirements of proposed Sec. 164.506(e) for
disclosing protected health information to business partners, including
policies and procedures for monitoring the business partners,
mitigating harm, and imposing sanctions where appropriate.
    It would address the policies and procedures for implementation of
the minimum necessary requirement as provided in proposed
Sec. 164.506(b). It would also include policies and procedures
addressing the creation of de-identified information pursuant to
Sec. 164.506(d). For example, a plan could have a policy that requires
employees to remove identifiers from protected health information for
all internal cost, quality, or performance evaluations. The plan would
document this policy and the procedures for removing the identifiers.
2. Individual Requests for Restricting Uses and Disclosures
    We propose to require covered health care providers to document how
they would implement an individual's request to restrict uses and
disclosures. Under proposed Sec. 164.506(c)(1)(iii), a covered entity
need not agree to such restrictions. This section of the documentation
would describe who (if anyone) in the covered entity is permitted to
agree to such restrictions, and if such restrictions were accepted, how
they would be implemented. For example, a provider may require that
once an individual has requested a limitation on a use or disclosure,
the affected information is stamped, marked or kept in a separate file.
The provider could also have a policy of never agreeing to requests for
such restrictions.
3. Notice of Information Practices
    We propose to require covered plans and providers to document their
policies and procedures for complying with the requirement in
Sec. 164.512 to develop, make available or disseminate, and amend their
notices of information practices. This documentation would address, at
a minimum, who is responsible for developing and updating the notice,
who would serve as the ``contact'' person on the notice, how the notice
would be disseminated to individuals, and how to respond to inquiries
regarding information practices.
4. Inspection and Copying
    We propose to require covered plans and providers to document
policies and procedures to address how they would receive and comply
with individual requests for inspection, and copying, in compliance
with Sec. 164.514 of this proposed rule. Policies and procedures should
address, at a minimum, a listing of the designated record sets to which
access will be provided, any fees to be charged, and the reasons (if
any) that the entity would deny a request for inspection and copying.
5. Amendment or Correction
    We propose to require covered plans and providers to develop and
document policies and procedures to address how they would receive and
comply with individual requests for amendment or correction of their
records, in compliance with Sec. 164.516 of this proposed rule.
Policies and procedures should include the process for determining
whether a request for amendment or correction should be granted, the
process to follow if a request is denied, and how the entity would
notify other entities, including business partners, if the request is
accepted. For example, if a covered entity accepts an individual's
request for an amendment or correction, the entity could document
specific procedures regarding how to make the appropriate additions or
notations to the original information. Without such documentation,
members of the workforce could accidentally expunge or remove the
incorrect information.
6. Accounting for Disclosures
    We propose to require covered entities to develop and document
their policies and procedures for complying with the requirement in
Sec. 164.515 to provide on request an accounting for disclosures for
purposes other than treatment, payment or health care operations. In
order to respond to requests for accounting within a reasonable period
of time, the entity would need to have a system for accounting in place
well in advance of any potential requests. The entity would need to
evaluate its record keeping system and determine how best to build in
the capacity to respond to such a request. For example, if the entity
chooses to keep a regular log of disclosures, it would have to begin
keeping such logs routinely. If instead the entity chooses to rely on a
record keeping system to reconstruct an accounting, it should develop
appropriate procedures for members of the workforce to follow when
faced with an individual's request.
7. Administrative Requirements
    We propose to require covered entities to document their policies
and procedures for complying with the applicable administrative
requirements in proposed Sec. 164.518. This would include designation
of the privacy official required by Sec. 164.518(a) including a
description of his or her responsibilities; a description of how the
entity would comply with the

[[Page 59994]]

training and certification requirements for members of its workforce
under Sec. 164.518(b); a description of the covered entity's safeguards
required by Sec. 164.518(c); a description of how the covered plan or
provider would meet the requirements of Sec. 164.518(d) to receive
individual's complaints; a description of how the covered entity would
meet the requirements for sanctioning members of its workforce under
Sec. 164.518(e); and a description of how the covered entity would take
steps to mitigate any deleterious effect of a use or disclosure of
protected health information as required by Sec. 164.518(f).
    The documentation would also address how access to protected health
information is regulated by the entity, including safeguards, including
the procedures that would be required by proposed Sec. 164.518. For
covered entities that are part of a larger organization that is not a
covered entity (e.g., an on-site clinic at a university or the group
health plan component of an employer), we would require such entities
to develop and document policies and procedures that ensure that
protected health information does not flow outside the health care
component of the organization in violation of this proposed rule. For
example, a school-based health clinic should have policies and
procedures to prevent treatment information from crossing over into the
school's record system.
    Many disclosures would require verification of the identity of the
person making the request, and sometimes also verification of the legal
authority behind the request. The documentation required by this
section would include a description of the entity's verification
policies (e.g., what proof would be acceptable), and who would be
responsible for ensuring that the necessary verification has occurred
before the information is disclosed.
8. Record Keeping Requirements
    We propose record keeping requirements related to several
provisions. In addition to the documentation of policies and procedures
described above, we would require covered entities, as applicable, to:
document restrictions on uses and disclosures agreed to pursuant to
Sec. 164.506(c); maintain copies of authorization forms and signed
authorizations (Sec. 164.508) and contracts used with business partners
(Sec. 164.506(e)); maintain notices of information practices developed
under Sec. 164.512; maintain written statements of denials of requests
for inspection and copying pursuant to Sec. 164.514; maintain any
response made to a request from an individual for amendment or
correction of information, either in the form of the correction or
amendment or the statement of the reason for denial and, if supplied,
the individual's statement of disagreement, for as long as the
protected health information is maintained (Sec. 164.516); maintain
signed certifications by members of the workforce required by
Sec. 164.518(b); and, maintain a record of any complaints received
(Sec. 164.518(d)). Unless otherwise addressed in this proposal, covered
entities would be required to retain these documents for six years,
which is the statute of limitations period for the civil penalties. We
note that additional records or compliance reports may be required by
the Secretary for enforcement of this rule. (Sec. 164.522(d)(1)).

I. Relationship to Other Laws

1. Relationship to State Laws
[Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Relationship to State laws'']
    Congress addressed the issue of preemption of State law explicitly
in the statute, in section 1178 of the Act. Consonant with the
underlying statutory purpose to simplify the financial and
administrative transactions associated with the provision of health
care, the new section 1178(a)(1) sets out a ``general rule'' that State
law provisions that are contrary to the provisions or requirements of
part C of title XI or the standards or implementation specifications
adopted or established thereunder are preempted by the federal
requirements. The statute provides three exceptions to this general
rule: (1) For State laws which the Secretary determines are necessary
to prevent fraud and abuse, ensure appropriate State regulation of
insurance and health plans, for State reporting on health care
delivery, and other purposes; (2) for State laws which address
controlled substances; and (3) for State laws relating to the privacy
of individually identifiable health information which, as provided for
by the related provision of section 264(c)(2), are contrary to and more
stringent than the federal requirements. Section 1178 also carves out,
in sections 1178(b) and 1178(c), certain areas of State authority which
are not limited or invalidated by the provisions of part C of title XI;
these areas relate to public health and State regulation of health
plans.
    Section 264 of HIPAA contains a related preemption provision.
Section 264(c)(2) is, as discussed above, an exception to the ``general
rule'' that the federal standards and requirements preempt contrary
State law. Section 264(c)(2) provides, instead, that contrary State
laws that relate to the privacy of individually identifiable health
information will not be preempted by the federal requirements, if they
are ``more stringent'' than those requirements. This policy, under
which the federal privacy protections act as a floor, but not a ceiling
on, privacy protections, is consistent with the Secretary's
Recommendations.
    Aside from the cross-reference to section 264(c)(2) in section
1178(a)(2)(B), several provisions of section 1178 relate to the
proposed privacy standards. These include the general preemption rule
of section 1178(a)(1), the carve-out for public health and related
reporting under section 1178(b), and the carve-out for reporting and
access to records for the regulation of health plans by States under
section 1178(c). Other terms that occur in section 264(c)(2) also
appear in section 1178: The underlying test for preemption--whether a
State law is ``contrary'' to the federal standards, requirements or
implementation specifications--appears throughout section 1178(a),
while the issue of what is a ``State law'' for preemption purposes
applies throughout section 1178. In light of these factors, it seems
logical to develop a regulatory framework that addresses the various
issues raised by section 1178, not just those parts of it implicated by
section 264(c)(2). Accordingly, the rules proposed below propose
regulatory provisions covering these issues as part of the general
provisions in proposed part 160, with sections made specifically
applicable to the proposed privacy standard where appropriate.
    a. The ``general rule'' of preemption of State law. Section
1178(a)(1) provides the following ``general rule'' for the preemption
of State law:

    Except as provided in paragraph (2), a provision or requirement
under this part (part C of title XI), or a standard or
implementation specification adopted or established under sections
1172 through 1174, shall supersede any contrary provision of State
law, including a provision of State law that requires medical or
health plan records (including billing information) to be maintained
or transmitted in written rather than electronic form.

As we read this provision, the provisions and requirements of part C of
title XI, along with the standards and implementation specifications
adopted thereunder, do not supplant State law, except to the extent
such State law is ``contrary'' to the federal statutory or regulatory
scheme. Moreover, the provisions and requirements of part C of

[[Page 59995]]

title XI, along with the standards and implementation specifications
adopted thereunder, do not preempt contrary State law where one of the
exceptions provided for by section 1178(a)(2) applies or the law in
question lies within the scope of the carve-outs made by sections
1178(b) and (c). Thus, States may continue to regulate in the area
covered by part C of title XI and the regulations and implementation
specifications adopted or established thereunder, except to the extent
States adopt laws that are contrary to the federal statutory and
regulatory scheme, and even those contrary State laws may continue to
be enforceable, if they come within the statutory exceptions or carve-
outs.
    We note, however, that many of the Administrative Simplifications
regulations will have preemptive effect. The structure of many of the
regulations, particularly those addressing the various administrative
transactions, is to prescribe the use of a particular form or format
for the transaction in question. Where the prescribed form or format is
used, covered entities are required to accept the transaction. A State
may well not be able to require additional requirements for such
transactions consistent with the federally prescribed form or format.
    b. Exceptions for State laws the Secretary determines necessary for
certain purposes. Section 1178(a)(2) lists several exceptions to the
general preemption rule of section 1178(a)(1). The first set of
exceptions are those listed at sections 1178(a)(2)(A)(i) and
1178(a)(2)(A)(ii). These exceptions are for provisions of State law
which the Secretary determines are necessary: (1) To prevent fraud and
abuse; (2) to ensure appropriate State regulation of insurance and
health plans; (3) for State reporting on health care delivery or costs;
(4) for other purposes; or (5) which address controlled substances.
    Proposed Sec. 160.203(a) below provides for determinations under
these statutory provisions. The criteria at proposed Sec. 160.203(a)
follow the statute. As is more fully discussed below, however, two of
the terms used in this section of the proposed rules are defined terms:
``contrary'' and ``State law.'' The process for making such
determinations is discussed below.
    c. Exceptions for State laws relating to the privacy of
individually identifiable health information. The third exception to
the ``general rule'' that the federal requirements, standards, and
implementation specifications preempt contrary State law concerns State
laws relating to the privacy of individually identifiable health
information. Section 1178(a)(2)(B) provides that a State law is
excepted from this general rule, which, ``subject to section 264(c)(2)
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996,
relates to the privacy of individually identifiable health
information.'' Section 264(c)(2) of HIPAA provides that the HIPAA
privacy regulation, which is proposed in the accompanying proposed
subpart B of proposed part 160, will not supersede ``a contrary
provision of State law, if the provision of State law imposes
requirements, standards, or implementation specifications that are more
stringent than the requirements, standards, or implementation
specifications imposed'' under the regulation at proposed subpart E of
proposed part 164.
    It is recognized that States generally have laws that relate to the
privacy of individually identifiable health information. These laws
continue to be enforceable, unless they are contrary to part C of title
XI or the standards, requirements, or implementation specifications
adopted or established pursuant to the proposed subpart x. Under
section 264(c)(2), not all contrary provisions of State privacy laws
are preempted; rather, the law provides that contrary provisions that
are also ``more stringent'' than the federal regulatory requirements or
implementation specifications will continue to be enforceable.
    d. Definitions. There are a number of ambiguities in sections
1178(a)(2)(B) and 264(c)(2) of HIPAA. Clarifying the statute through
the regulations will generally provide substantially more guidance to
the regulated entities and the public as to which requirements,
standards, and implementation specifications apply. For these reasons,
the rules propose below to interpret several ambiguous statutory terms
by regulation.
    There are five definitional questions that arise in considering
whether or not a State law is preempted under section 264(c)(2): (1)
What is a ``provision'' of State law? (2) What is a ``State law''? (3)
What kind of State law, under section 1178(a)(2)(B), ``relates to the
privacy of individually identifiable health information?'' (4) When is
a provision of State law at issue ``contrary'' to the analogous
provision of the federal regulations? (5) When is a provision of State
law ``more stringent than'' the analogous provision of the federal
regulations? We discuss these questions and our proposed regulatory
answers below.
    i. What is a ``provision'' of State law?
    The initial question that arises in the preemption analysis is,
what does one compare? The statute directs this analysis by requiring
the comparison of a ``provision of State law [that] imposes
requirements, standards, or implementations specifications'' with ``the
requirements, standards, or implementation specifications imposed
under'' the federal regulation. The statute thus appears to contemplate
that what will be compared are the State and federal requirements that
are analogous, i.e., that address the same subject matter. Accordingly,
a dictionary-type definition of the term ``provision'' does not seem
appropriate, as the contours of a given ``provision'' will be largely
defined by the contours of the specific ``requirement[], standard[], or
implementation specification'' at issue.
    What does one do when there is a State provision and no comparable
or analogous federal provision, or the converse is the case? The short
answer would seem to be that, since there is nothing to compare, there
cannot be an issue of a ``contrary'' requirement, and so the preemption
issue is not presented. Rather, the stand-alone requirement--be it
State or federal--is effective. There may, however, be situations in
which there is a federal requirement with no directly analogous State
requirement, but where several State requirements in combination would
seem to be contrary in effect to the federal requirement. This
situation usually will be addressed through the tests for ``contrary,''
discussed below.
    At this juncture, it is difficult to frame options for dealing with
this issue, because it is not clear that more of a structure is needed
than the statute already provides. Rather, we solicit comment on how
the term ``provision'' might be best defined for the purpose of the
preemption analysis under the statute, along with examples of possible
problems in making the comparison between a provision of State law and
the federal regulations.
    ii. What is a ``State law''?
    It is unclear what the term ``provision of State law'' in sections
1178 and 264(c) means. The question is whether the provision in
question must, in order to be considered to have preemptive effect, be
legislatively enacted or whether administratively adopted or judicially
decided State requirements must also be considered. Congress explicitly
addressed the same issue in a different part of HIPAA, section 102.
Section 102 enacted section 2723 of the Public Health Service Act,
which is a preemption provision that applies to issuers of health
insurance to ERISA plans. Section 2723 contains in subsection (d)(1)
the following definition of ``State law'': ``The term

[[Page 59996]]

``State law'' includes all laws, decisions, rules, regulations, or
other State action having the effect of law, of any State. A law of the
United States applicable only to the District of Columbia shall be
treated as a State law rather than a law of the United States.
    By contrast, Congress provided no definition of the term ``State
law'' in section 264. This omission suggests two policy options. One is
to adopt the above definition, as a reasonable definition of the term
and as an indication of what Congress probably intended in the
preemption context (the policy embodied in section 2723 is analogous to
that embodied in section 264(c)(2), in the sense that the State laws
that are not preempted are ones that provide protections to individuals
that go above and beyond the federal requirements). The other option is
to argue by negative implication that, since Congress could have but
did not enact the above definition in connection with sections 264 and
1178, it intended that a different definition be used, and that the
most reasonable alternative is to limit the State laws to be considered
to those that have been legislatively enacted.
    The Department does not consider the latter option to be a
realistic one. It is legally questionable and is also likely to be
extremely confusing and unworkable as a practical matter, as it will be
difficult to divorce State ``laws'' from implementing administrative
regulations or decisions or from judicial decisions. Also, much State
``privacy law''--e.g., the law concerning the physician/patient
privilege--is not found in statutes, but is rather in State common law.
Finally, since health care providers and others are bound by State
regulations and decisions, they would most likely find a policy that
drew a line based on where a legal requirement originated very
confusing and unhelpful. As a result, we conclude that the language in
section 102 represents a legally supportable approach that is, for
practical reasons, a realistic option, and it is accordingly proposed
in proposed Sec. 160.202 below.
    iii. What is a law that ``relates to the privacy of individually
identifiable health information''?
    The meaning of the term ``relate to'' has been extensively
adjudicated in a somewhat similar context, the issue of the preemption
of State laws by ERISA. Section 514(a) of ERISA (29 U.S.C. 1144(a))
provides that ERISA ``shall supersede any and all State laws insofar as
they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan.''
(Emphasis added.) The U.S. Supreme Court alone has decided 17 ERISA
preemption cases, and there are numerous lower court cases. The term
also has been interpreted in other contexts. Thus, there would seem to
be several options for defining the term ``relates to'': (1) By using
the criteria developed by the Supreme Court as they evolve, (2) by
using the criteria developed by the Supreme Court, but on a static
basis, and (3) based on the legislative history, by setting federal
criteria.
    The first option would be based on the definition adopted in an
early ERISA case, Shaw v. Delta Airlines, Inc., 463 U.S. 85 (1983), as
it continues to evolve. In Shaw, a unanimous Supreme Court adopted a
very broad reading of the term, holding that a law ``relates to'' an
employee benefit plan ``if it has a connection with or reference to''
such a plan. Later cases have developed a more particularized and
complex definition of this general definition. The Supreme Court has
also applied the Shaw definition outside of the ERISA context. In
Morales v. Trans World Airlines, 504 U.S. 374 (1992), the Court defined
the term ``relating to'' in the Airline Deregulation Act by using the
definition of the term ``relates to'' developed under the ERISA cases
above. While this option would appear to be a supportable reading of
the statutory term, tying the agency interpretation to an evolving
court interpretation will make it more difficult to make judgments, and
particular judgments may change as the underlying court interpretations
change.
    The second option we considered would ``freeze'' the definition of
``relates to'' as the Court has currently defined it. This option also
is a supportable reading of the statutory term, but is less of a moving
target than the prior option. The complexity of the underlying court
definition presents problems.
    The option selected and reflected in the rules proposed below grows
out of the movement in recent years of the Supreme Court away from the
literal, textual approach of Shaw and related cases to an analysis that
looks more at the purposes and effects of the preemption statute in
question. In New York State Conference of Blue Cross v. Travelers
Insurance Co., 514 U.S. 645 (1995), the Court held that the proper
inquiry in determining whether the State law in question related to an
employee benefit plan was to look to the objectives of the (ERISA)
statute as a guide to the scope of the State law that Congress
understood would survive. The Court drew a similar line in Morales,
concluding that State actions that affected airline rates, routes, or
services in ``too tenuous, remote, or peripheral a manner'' would not
be preempted. 504 U.S. at 384. The Court drew a conceptually consistent
line with respect to the question of the effect of a State law in
English v. General Electric Co., 496 U.S. 72, 84 (1990); see also, Gade
v. National Solid Wastes Management Ass'n., 505 U.S. 88 (1992). The
Court held that deciding which State laws were preempted by the OSH Act
required also looking at the effect of the State law in question, and
that those which regulated occupational safety and health in a ``clear,
direct, and substantial way'' would be preempted. These cases suggest
an approach that looks to the legislative history of HIPAA and seeks to
determine what kinds of State laws Congress meant, in this area, to
leave intact and also seeks to apply more of a ``rule of reason'' in
deciding which State laws ``relate to'' privacy and which do not.
    The legislative history of HIPAA offers some insight into the
meaning of the term ``relates to.'' The House Report (House Rep. No.
496, 104th Cong., 2d Sess., at 103) states that--

    The intent of this section is to ensure that State privacy laws
that are more stringent than the requirements and standards
contained in the bill are not superseded.

Based on this legislative history, one could argue that the ``State
laws'' covered by the ``relates to'' clause are simply those that are
specifically or explicitly designed to regulate the privacy of personal
health information, and not ones that might have the incidental effect
of doing so. Thus, the option selected below appears to be consistent
with the Court's approach in Travelers, and, together with the
``effect'' test, seems to be closer to how the Court is analyzing
preemption issues. It makes sense on a common sense basis as well, and
appears, from the little legislative history available, to be what
Congress intended in this context.
    iv. When is a provision of State law ``contrary'' to the analogous
federal requirement?
    The statute uses the same language in both section 1178(a)(1) and
section 264(c)(2) to delineate the general precondition for preemption:
the provision of State law must be ``contrary'' to the relevant federal
requirement, standard, or implementation specification; the term
``contrary,'' however, is not defined. It should be noted that this
issue (the meaning of the term ``contrary'') does not arise solely in
the context of the proposed privacy standard. The term ``contrary''
appears throughout section 1178(a) and is a precondition for any
preemption analysis done under that section.

[[Page 59997]]

    The definition set out at proposed Sec. 160.202 embodies the tests
that the courts have developed to analyze what is known as ``conflict
preemption.'' In this analysis, the courts will consider a provision of
State law to be in conflict with a provision of federal law where it
would be impossible for a private party to comply with both State and
federal requirements or where the provision of State law ``stands as an
obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and
objectives of Congress.'' This latter test has been further defined as,
where the State law in question ``interferes with the methods by which
the federal statute was designed to reach (its) goal.'' International
Paper Co. v. Ouellette, 479 U.S. 481, 494 (1987). In Gade, the Supreme
Court applied this latter test to preempt an Illinois law and
regulations that imposed additional, non-conflicting conditions on
employers, holding that the additional conditions conflicted with the
underlying congressional purpose to have one set of requirements apply.
This test, then, is particularly relevant with respect to the other
HIPAA regulations, where Congress clearly intended uniform standards to
apply nationwide.
    The Department is of the view that this definition should be
workable and is probably what Congress intended in using the term--as a
shorthand reference to the case law. We considered a broader definition
(``inconsistent with''), but rejected it on the grounds that it would
have less legal support and would be no easier to apply than the
statutory term ``contrary'' itself.
    v. What is the meaning of ``more stringent'?
    The issue of when a provision of State law is ``more stringent''
than the comparable ``requirements, standards, or implementation
specifications'' of the HIPAA privacy regulation is not an easy one. In
general, it seems reasonable to assume that ``more stringent'' means
``providing greater privacy protection'' but, such an interpretation
leads to somewhat different applications, depending on the context. For
example, a State law that provided for fewer and more limited
disclosures than the HIPAA privacy regulation would be ``more
stringent.'' At the same time, a State law that provides for more and/
or greater penalties for wrongful disclosures than does the HIPAA
privacy regulation would also be ``more stringent.'' Thus, in the
former case, ``more stringent'' means less or fewer, while in the
latter case, ``more stringent'' means more or greater. In addition,
some situations are more difficult to characterize. For example, if the
HIPAA privacy regulation requires disclosure to the individual on
request and a State law prohibits disclosure in the circumstance in
question, which law is ``more stringent'' or ``provides more privacy
protection'?
    A continuum of regulatory options is available. At one end of the
continuum is the minimalist approach of not interpreting the term
``more stringent'' further or spelling out only a general
interpretation, such as the ``provides more privacy protection''
standard, and leaving the specific applications to later case-by-case
determinations. At the other end of the continuum is the approach of
spelling out in the regulation a number of different applications, to
create a very specific analytic framework for future determinations. We
propose below the latter approach for several reasons: specific
criteria will simplify the determination process for agency officials,
as some determinations will be already covered by the regulation, while
others will be obvious; specific criteria will also provide guidance
for determinations where issue of ``stringency'' is not obvious; courts
will be more likely to give deference to agency determinations, leading
to greater uniformity and consistency of expectation; and the public,
regulated entities, and States will have more notice as to what the
determinations are likely to be.
    The specific criteria proposed at proposed Sec. 160.202 are
extrapolated from the principles of the fair information practices that
underlie and inform these proposed rules and the Secretary's
Recommendations. For example, limiting disclosure of personal health
information obviously protects privacy; thus, under the criteria
proposed below, the law providing for less disclosure is considered to
be ``more stringent.'' Similarly, as the access of an individual to his
or her protected health information is considered to be central to
enabling the individual to protect such information, the criteria
proposed below treat a law granting greater rights of access as ``more
stringent.'' We recognize that many State laws require patients to
authorize or consent to disclosures of their health information for
treatment and/or payment purposes. We consider individual authorization
generally to be more protective of privacy interests than the lack of
such authorization, so such State requirements would generally stand,
under the definition proposed below.
    However, we would interpret a State law relating to individual
authorization to be preempted if the law requires, or would permit a
provider or health plan to require, as a condition of treatment or
payment for health care, an individual to authorize uses or disclosures
for purposes other than treatment, payment and health care operations,
and if such authorization would override restrictions or limitations in
this regulation relating to the uses and disclosures for purposes other
than treatment, payment and health care operations. For example, if a
State law permitted or required a provider to obtain an individual
authorization for disclosure as a condition of treatment, and further
permitted the provider to include in the authorization disclosures for
research or for commercial purposes, the State law would be preempted
with respect to the compelled authorization for research or commercial
purposes. At the same time, if a State law required a provider to
obtain an individual authorization for disclosure as a condition of
treatment, and further required the provider to include an
authorization for the provider to disclosure data to a State data
reporting agency, such a law would not be preempted, because State laws
that require such data reporting are saved from preemption under
section Sec. 1178(c) of the statute.
    In addition, to the extent that a State consent law does not
contain other consent or authorization requirements that parallel or
are stricter than the applicable federal requirements, those detailed
federal requirements would also continue to apply. We solicit comment
in particular on how these proposed criteria would be likely to operate
with respect to particular State privacy laws.
    e. The process for making administrative determinations regarding
the preemption of State health information privacy laws. Because States
generally have laws that relate to the privacy of individually
identifiable health information, there may be conflicts between
provisions of various State laws and the federal requirements. Where
such conflicts appear to exist, questions may arise from the regulated
entities or from the public concerning which requirements apply. It is
possible that such questions may also arise in the context of the
Secretary's enforcement of the civil monetary penalty provisions of
section 1176. The Secretary accordingly proposes to adopt the following
process for responding to such comments and making the determinations
necessary to carry out her responsibilities under section 1176.
    The rules proposed below would establish two related processes: one
for making the determinations called for by

[[Page 59998]]

section 1178(a)(2)(A) of the Act and the other for issuing advisory
opinions regarding whether a provision of State law would come within
the exception provided for by section 1178(a)(2)(B).
    i. Determinations under section 1178(a)(2)(A).
    The rules proposed below should not usually implicate section
1178(a)(2)(A), which provides that a State law will not be preempted
where the Secretary determines it is necessary for one or more of five
specific purposes: (1) To prevent fraud and abuse; (2) to ensure
appropriate State regulation of insurance and health plans; (3) for
State reporting on health care delivery or costs; (4) for other
purposes; or (5) which address controlled substances. The process for
implementing this statutory provision is proposed here, because the
issue of how such preemption issues will be handled has been raised in
prior HIPAA rulemakings and needs to be addressed, and, as explained
above, the statutory provision itself is fairly intertwined (in terms
of the specific terms used), with the preemption provisions of the
statute that relate to privacy.
    The process proposed below for determinations by the Secretary
would permit States to request an exception to the general rule of
preemption. The decision to limit, at least as an initial matter, the
right to request such determinations to States was made for several
reasons. First, States are obviously most directly concerned by
preemption, in that it is State legislative, judicial, or executive
action that the federal requirements supersede. Principles of comity
dictate that States be given the opportunity to make the case that
their laws should not be superseded. Second, States are in the best
position to address the issue of how their laws operate and what their
intent is, both of which are relevant to the determination to be made.
Third, we need to control the process as an initial matter, so that the
Secretary is not overwhelmed by requests. Fourth, where particular
federal requirements will have a major impact on providers, plans, or
clearinghouses within a particular State, we assume that they will be
able to work with their State governments to raise the issue with the
Secretary; the discussion process that such negotiations should entail
should help crystallize the legal and other issues for the Secretary
and, hence, result in better determinations. We emphasize that HHS may
well revisit this issue, once it has gained some experience with the
proposed process.
    Proposed Sec. 160.204(a)(1) sets out a number of requirements for
requests for determinations. In general, the purpose of these
requirements is to provide as complete a statement as possible of the
relevant information as an initial matter, to minimize the time needed
for the Secretarial determination.
    The remaining requirements of proposed Sec. 160.204(a) generally
are designed to set out an orderly process and effect of the
determinations. Of particular note is proposed Sec. 160.204(a)(5),
which provides that such determinations apply only to transactions that
are wholly intrastate. We recognize that in today's economy, many,
perhaps most, transactions will be interstate, so that the effect of a
positive determination could be minimal under this provision.
Nonetheless, we think that there is no practical alternative to the
proposed policy. We do not see how it would be practical to split up
transactions that involved more than one State, when one State's law
was preempted and the other's was not. We do not see why the non-
preempted law should govern the transaction, to the extent it involved
an entity in a State whose law was preempted. Quite aside from the
sovereignty issues such a result would raise, such a result would be
very confusing for the health care industry and others working with it
and thus inconsistent with the underlying goal of administrative
simplification. Rather, such a situation would seem to be a classic
case for application of federal standards, and proposed
Sec. 160.204(a)(5) would accordingly provide for this.
    ii. Advisory opinions under section 1178(a)(2)(B).
    The rules proposed below lay out a similar process for advisory
opinions under section 1178(a)(2)(B). That section of the statute
provides that, subject to the requirements of section 264(c)(2) (the
provision of HIPAA that establishes the ``more stringent'' preemption
test), State laws that ``relate to the privacy of individually
identifiable health information'' are excepted from the general rule
that the HIPAA standards, requirements, and implementation
specifications preempt contrary State law.
    Unlike section 1178(a)(2)(A), section 1178(a)(2)(B) does not
provide for the making of a determination by the Secretary.
Nonetheless, it is clear that the Secretary may make judgments about
the legal effect of particular State privacy laws in making compliance
and enforcement decisions. It is also foreseeable that the Secretary
will be asked to take a position on whether particular State privacy
laws are preempted or not. We have concluded that the best way of
addressing these concerns is to provide a mechanism by which the
Secretary can issue advisory opinions, so that the public may be
informed about preemption judgments the Secretary has made. See
proposed Sec. 160.204(b).
    The process proposed below for requesting advisory opinions is
limited to States, for the reasons described in the preceding section.
The requirements for requests for advisory opinions are similar to the
requirements for determinations in proposed Sec. 160.204(a), but are
tailored to the different statutory requirements of sections
1178(a)(2)(A) and 264(c)(2). As with proposed Sec. 164.204(a), the
process proposed below would provide for publication of advisory
opinions issued by the Secretary on an annual basis, to ensure that the
public is informed of the decisions made in this area.
    f. Carve-out for State public health laws. Section 1178(b) provides
that ``Nothing in this part shall be construed to invalidate or limit
the authority, power, or procedures established under any law providing
for the reporting of disease or injury, child abuse, birth, or death,
public health surveillance, or public health investigation or
intervention.'' This section appears to carve out an area over which
the States have traditionally exercised oversight and authority--the
collection of vital statistics, the enforcement of laws regarding child
abuse and neglect, and the conduct of public health surveillance,
investigation, and intervention. State laws in these areas may involve
reporting of individually identifiable health information to State or
local authorities. Section 1178(b) indicates that existing or future
State laws in these areas are enforceable, notwithstanding any privacy
requirements adopted pursuant to section 264(c). In addition, covered
entities should not be inhibited from complying with requests
authorized by State law for release of information by public health
authorities for the stated purposes.
    It should be noted that the limitation of section 1178(b) applies
to the ``authority, power, or procedures established under any law.''
Public health laws often convey broad general authorities for the
designated agency to protect public health, including enforcement
powers, and these State authorities and powers would remain
enforceable. Further, section 1178(b) also covers ``procedures''
authorized by law; we read this language as including State
administrative regulations and guidelines.
    The proposed rules propose to address these concerns by treating
the

[[Page 59999]]

disclosures covered by section 1178(b) as allowable disclosures for
public health activities under proposed Sec. 164.510(b). Thus, those
disclosures permitted under proposed Sec. 164.510(b) are intended to
be, with respect to disclosures authorized by State law, at least as
broad as section 1178(b). This means that disclosures that are
authorized by State law but which do not come within the scope of
proposed Sec. 164.510(b) are considered to fall outside of the
limitation of section 1178(b). In addition, since similar activities
and information gathering are conducted by the federal government,
disclosures to public health authorities authorized by federal law
would be permitted disclosures under this proposed rule and applicable
federal law will govern the use and re-disclosure of the information.
    g. Carve-out for State laws relating to oversight of health plans.
Section 1178(c) provides that nothing in part C of title XI limits the
ability of States to require health plans ``to report, or to provide
access to, information for management audits, financial audits, program
monitoring and evaluation, facility licensure or certification, or
individual licensure or certification.'' This section thus also carves
out an area in which the States have traditionally regulated health
care as an area which the statute intends to leave in place. State laws
requiring the reporting of or access to information of the type covered
by section 1178(c) will in certain cases involve the reporting of, or
access to, individually identifiable health information. Accordingly,
provision has been made for such reporting and access by making such
reporting and access permitted disclosures and uses under this proposed
rule. See proposed Sec. 164.510(c).
2. Relationship to Other Federal Laws
[Please label comments about this section with the subject:
``Relationship to other federal laws'']
    The rules proposed below also would affect various federal
programs, some of which may have requirements that are, or appear to
be, inconsistent with the requirements proposed below. Such federal
programs include those programs that are operated directly by the
federal government, such as the health benefit programs for federal
employees or the health programs for military personnel. They also
include a wide variety of health services or benefit programs in which
health services or benefits are provided by the private sector or by
State or local government, but which are governed by various federal
laws. Examples of the latter types of programs would be the Medicare
and Medicaid programs, the health plans governed by the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 U.S.C. 1001, et seq.
(ERISA), the various clinical services programs funded by federal
grants, and substance abuse treatment programs.
    Some of the above programs are explicitly covered by HIPAA. Section
1171 of the Act defines the term ``health plan'' to include the
following federally conducted, regulated, or funded programs: group
plans under ERISA which either have 50 or more participants or are
administered by an entity other than the employer who established and
maintains the plan; federally qualified health maintenance
organizations; Medicare; Medicaid; Medicare supplemental policies; the
health care program for active military personnel; the health care
program for veterans; the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the
Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS); the Indian health service program under
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, 25 U.S.C. 1601, et seq.; and
the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. There also are many
other federally conducted, regulated, or funded programs in which
individually identifiable health information is created or maintained,
but which do not come within the statutory definition of ``health
plan.'' While these latter types of federally conducted, regulated, or
assisted programs are not explicitly covered by part C of title XI in
the same way that the programs listed in the statutory definition of
``health plan'' are covered, the statute may nonetheless apply to
transactions and other activities conducted under such programs. This
is likely to be the case where the federal entity or federally
regulated or funded entity provides health services; the requirements
of part c are likely to apply to such an entity as a ``health care
provider.'' Thus, the issue of how different federal requirements apply
is likely to arise in numerous contexts.
    When two federal statutes appear to conflict, the courts generally
engage in what is called an ``implied repeal'' analysis. The first step
in such an analysis is to look for some way in which to reconcile the
apparently conflicting requirements. Only if the conflicting provisions
cannot be reconciled do courts reach the second step of the analysis,
in which they look to see whether the later statute repealed the prior
statute (to the extent of the conflict) by implication. In making such
a determination, the courts look to the later statute and its
legislative history, to see if there is evidence as to whether Congress
intended to leave the prior statute in place or whether it intended the
later statute to supersede the prior statute, to the extent of the
conflict between the two. It is not a foregone conclusion that a later
statute will repeal inconsistent provisions of a prior statute. Rather,
there are cases in which the courts have held prior, more specific
statutes not to be impliedly repealed by later, more general statutes.
    As noted above, the section 1171 of the Act explicitly makes
certain federal programs subject to the standards and implementation
specifications promulgated by the Secretary, while entities carrying
out others are implicitly covered by the scope of the term ``health
care provider.'' The legislative history of the statute is silent with
respect to how these requirements were to operate in the federal sector
vis-a-vis these and other federal programs with potentially conflicting
requirements. Congress is presumed to have been aware that various
federal programs that the privacy and other standards would reach would
be governed by other federal requirements, so the silence of the
legislative history and the limited reach of the statute would seem to
be significant. On the other hand, Congress' express inclusion of
certain federal programs in the statute also has significance, as it
constitutes an express Congressional statement that the HIPAA standards
and implementation specifications apply to these programs. In light of
the absence of relevant legislative history, we do not consider this
Congressional statement strong enough to support a conclusion of
implied repeal, where the conflict is one between the HIPAA regulatory
standards and implementation specifications and another federal
statute. However, it seems strong enough to support an inference that,
with respect to these programs, the HIPAA standards and implementation
specifications establish the federal policy in the case of a conflict
at the regulatory level.
    Thus, the first principle that applies where both the HIPAA
standards and implementation specifications and the requirements of
another federal program apply is that we must seek to reconcile and
accommodate any apparently conflicting federal requirements. Two
conclusions flow from this principle. First, where one federal statute
or regulation permits an activity that another federal statute or
regulation requires, and both statutes apply to the entity in question,
there is no conflict, because it is possible to comply with both sets
of federal requirements.

[[Page 60000]]

Second, where one federal statute or regulation permits, but does not
require, an activity that another federal statute or regulation
prohibits, there is again no conflict, because it is possible to comply
with both sets of federal requirements. In each case, the entity has
lost some discretion that it would otherwise have had under the more
permissive set of requirements, but in neither case has it been
required to do something that is illegal under either federal program.
    There will, however, also be cases where the privacy or other
Administrative Simplification standards and implementation
specifications cannot be reconciled with the requirements of another
federal program. In such a case the issue of implied repeal is
presented. As suggested above, we think that where the conflict is
between the privacy or other Administrative simplification regulations
and another federal statute, the regulatory requirements would give
way, because there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that
part C of title XI is intended to repeal other federal laws. For
example, if other law prohibits the dissemination of classified or
other sensitive information, this rule's requirements for granting
individuals' right to copy their own records would give way. Where the
conflict is between the Administrative Simplification regulatory
requirements and other federal regulatory requirements that are
discretionary (not mandated by the other federal law), we think that
there is also insufficient evidence to support a finding of implied
repeal of the latter regulatory requirements, where the other federal
program at issue is not one specifically addressed in section 1171.
However, where the other federal program at issue is one of the ones
which Congress explicitly intended to have the Administrative
Simplification standards and implementation specifications apply to, by
including them in the definition of ``health plan'' in section 1171, we
think that there is evidence that the Administrative Simplification
standards and implementation specifications should prevail over
contrary exercises of discretion under those programs.
    We considered whether the preemption provision of section 264(c)(2)
of Public Law 104-191, discussed in the preceding section, would give
effect to State laws that would otherwise be preempted by federal law.
For example, we considered whether section 264(c)(2) could be read to
make the Medicare program subject to State laws relating to information
disclosures that are more stringent than the requirements proposed in
this rule, where such laws are presently preempted by the Medicare
statute. We also considered whether section 264(c)(2) could be read to
apply such State laws to procedures and activities of federal agencies,
such as administrative subpoenas and summons, that are prescribed under
the authority of federal law. In general, we do not think that section
264(c)(2) would work to apply State law provisions to federal programs
or activities with respect to which the State law provisions do not
presently apply. Rather, the effect of section 264(c)(2) is to give
preemptive effect to State laws that would otherwise be in effect, to
the extent they conflict with and are more stringent than the
requirements promulgated under the Administrative Simplification
authority of HIPAA. Thus, we do not believe that it is the intent of
section 264(c)(2) to give an effect to State law that it would not
otherwise have in the absence of section 264(c)(2).
    We explore some ramifications of these conclusions with respect to
specific federal programs below. We note that the summaries below do
not identify all possible conflicts or overlaps of the proposed rules
with other federal requirements; rather, we have attempted to explain
the general nature of the relationship of the different federal
programs. We would anticipate issuing more detailed guidance in the
future, when the final privacy policies are adopted, and the extent of
conflict or overlap can be ascertained. We also invite comment with
respect to issues raised by other federal programs.
    a. The Privacy Act. The Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, is not
preempted or amended by part C of title XI. The Privacy Act applies to
all federal agencies, and to certain federal contractors who operate
Privacy Act protected systems of records on behalf of federal agencies.
It does not, however, apply to non-federal entities that are reached by
part C. While the proposed rules are applicable to federal and non-
federal entities, they are not intended to create any conflict with
Privacy Act requirements. In any situation where compliance with the
proposed rules would lead a federal entity to a result contrary to the
Privacy Act, the Privacy Act controls. In sections of the proposed
rules which might otherwise create the appearance of a conflict with
Privacy Act requirements, entities subject to the Privacy Act are
directed to continue to comply with Privacy Act requirements.
    Because the Privacy Act gives federal agencies the authority to
promulgate agency-specific implementing regulations, and because the
Privacy Act also allows agencies to publish routine uses that have the
status of exceptions to the Privacy Act's general rule prohibiting
disclosure of Privacy Act protected information to third parties, the
issue of possible conflicts between the proposed Administrative
Simplification rules and existing Privacy Act rules and routine uses
must be addressed. Where the federal program at issue is one of the
ones that Congress explicitly intended to have the Administrative
Simplification standards and implementation specifications apply to, by
including them in the definition of ``health plan'' in section 1171, we
think that there is evidence that the Administrative Simplification
standards and implementation specifications should prevail over
contrary exercises of discretion under those programs. That is, to the
extent that a routine use is truly discretionary to an agency which is
also a covered entity under section 1172(a), the agency would not have
discretion to ignore the Administrative Simplification regulations. It
is possible, however, that in some cases there might be underlying
federal statutes that call for disclosure of certain types of
information, and routine uses could be promulgated as the only way to
implement those statutes and still comply with the Privacy Act. If this
were to happen or be the case, the routine use should prevail.
    b. The Substance Abuse Confidentiality regulations. Regulations
that are codified at 42 CFR part 2 establish confidentiality
requirements for the patient records of substance abuse ``programs''
that are ``federally assisted.'' Substance abuse programs are
specialized programs or personnel that provide alcohol and drug abuse
treatment, diagnosis, or referral for treatment. 42 CFR 2.11. The term
``federally assisted'' is broadly defined, and includes federal tax
exempt status and Medicare certification, among other criteria. 42 CFR
2.12(b). Such programs may not disclose patient identifying information
without the written consent of the patient, unless the information is
needed to respond to a medical emergency, or such information is
disclosed for purposes of research, audit, or evaluation. Disclosures
may not be made in response to a subpoena; rather, a court order is
required in order for a disclosure of covered records to be lawfully
made. Limited disclosures may also be made by such programs to State or
local officials under a State law requiring reporting of incidents of
suspected child abuse and neglect and

[[Page 60001]]

to law enforcement officials regarding a patient's crime on program
premises or against program personnel or a threat to commit such a
crime. 42 CFR 2.12. Unlike the rules proposed below, the
confidentiality protections continue indefinitely after death, although
part 2 would permit disclosure of identifying information relating to
the cause of death under laws relating to the collection of vital
statistics or permitting inquiry into cause of death.
    It seems likely that most, if not all, programs covered by the part
2 regulations will also be covered, as health care providers, by the
rules proposed below. As can be seen from the above summary, the part 2
regulations would not permit many disclosures that would be permitted
under proposed Sec. 164.510 below, such as many disclosures for law
enforcement, directory information, governmental health data systems,
and judicial and other purposes. In addition, the general permissive
disclosure for treatment or payment purposes at proposed Sec. 164.506
below would be inconsistent with the more restrictive requirements at
part 2. In such situations, providers (or others) subject to both sets
of requirements could not make disclosures prohibited by part 2, even
if the same disclosures would be permitted under the rules proposed
below.
    There are also a number of requirements of the part 2 regulations
that parallel the requirements proposed below. For example, the minimum
necessary rule, where applicable, would parallel a similar requirement
at 42 CFR 2.13(a). Similarly, the notice requirements of part 2, at 42
CFR 2.22 parallel the notice requirements proposed below, although the
notice required below would be more detailed and cover more issues. The
preemptive effect on State law should be the same under both part 2 and
section 264(c)(2). The requirements for disclosures for research
proposed below are likewise similar to those in part 2. In such cases,
health care providers would have to comply with the more extensive or
detailed requirements, but there should be no direct conflict.
    Many other provisions of the proposed rules, however, simply have
no counterpart in part 2. For example, the part 2 regulations do not
require programs to maintain an accounting of uses and disclosures, nor
do they provide for a right to request amendment or correction of
patient information. Similarly, the part 2 regulations contain no
prohibition on conditioning treatment or payment on provision of an
individual authorization for disclosure. In such situations, health
care providers would be bound by both sets of requirements.
    c. ERISA. ERISA was enacted in 1974 to regulate pension and welfare
employee benefit plans that are established by private sector
employers, unions, or both, to provide benefits to their workers and
dependents. An employee welfare benefit plan includes plans that
provide ``through the purchase of insurance or otherwise * * * medical,
surgical, or hospital care or benefits, or benefits in the event of
sickness, accident, disability, (or) death.'' 29 U.S.C. 1002(1). In
1996, Public Law 104-191 amended ERISA to require portability,
nondiscrimination, and renewability of health benefits provided by
group health plans and group health insurance issuers. Numerous,
although not all, ERISA plans are covered under the rules proposed
below as ``health plans.''
    As noted above, section 514(a) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 1144(a),
preempts all State laws that ``relate to'' any employee benefit plan.
However, section 514(b) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(2)(A), expressly
saves from preemption State laws which regulate insurance. Section of
ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(2)(B), provides that an ERISA plan is deemed
not to be an insurer for the purpose of regulating the plan under the
State insurance laws. Thus, under the deemer clause, States may not
treat ERISA plans as insurers subject to direct regulation by State
law. Finally, section 514(d) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 1144(d), provides that
ERISA does not ``alter, amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or supersede
any law of the United States.''
    We considered whether the preemption provision of section 264(c)(2)
of Public Law 104-191, discussed in the preceding section, would give
effect to State laws that would otherwise be preempted by section
514(a) of ERISA. Our reading of the statutes together is that the
effect of section 264(c)(2) is simply to leave in place State privacy
protections that would otherwise apply and which are more stringent
than the federal privacy protections. In the case of ERISA plans,
however, if those laws are preempted by section 514(a), they would not
otherwise apply. We do not think that it is the intent of section
264(c)(2) to give an effect to State law that it would not otherwise
have in the absence of section 264(c)(2). Thus, we would not view the
preemption provisions below as applying to State laws otherwise
preempted by section 514(a) of ERISA.
    Many plans covered by the rules proposed below are also subject to
ERISA requirements. To date our discussions and consultations have not
uncovered any particular ERISA requirements that would conflict with
the rules proposed below. However, we invite comment, particularly in
the form of specific identification of statutory or regulatory
provisions, of requirements under ERISA that would appear to conflict
with provisions of the rules proposed below.
    d. Other federally funded health programs. There are a number of
authorities under the Public Health Service Act and other legislation
that contain explicit confidentiality requirements either in the
enabling legislation or in the implementing regulations. Many of these
are so general that there would appear to be no problem of
inconsistency, in that nothing in the legislation or regulations would
appear to restrict the assisted provider's discretion to comply with
the requirements proposed below. There are, however, several
authorities under which either the requirements of the enabling
legislation or of the program regulations would impose requirements
that would differ from the rules proposed below. We have identified
several as presenting potential issues in this regard. First,
regulations applicable to the substance abuse block grant program
funded under section 1943(b) of the Public Health Service Act require
compliance with 42 CFR part 2, and thus raise the issues identified in
section 2 above. Second, there are a number of federal programs which,
either by statute or by regulation, restrict the disclosure of patient
information to, with minor exceptions, disclosures ``required by law.''
See, for example, the program of projects for prevention and control of
sexually transmitted diseases funded under section 318(e)(5) of the
Public Health Service Act (42 CFR 51b.404); the regulations
implementing the community health center program funded under section
330 of the Public Health Service Act (42 CFR 51c.110); the regulations
implementing the program of grants for family planning services under
title X of the Public Health Service Act (42 CFR 59.15); the
regulations implementing the program of grants for black lung clinics
funded under 30 U.S.C. 437(a) (42 CFR 55a.104); the regulations
implementing the program of maternal and child health projects funded
under section 501 of the Act (42 CFR 51a.6); the regulations
implementing the program of medical examinations of coal miners (42 CFR
37.80(a)). These legal requirements would restrict the grantees or
other entities under the programs

[[Page 60002]]

involved from making many of the disclosures that proposed Sec. 164.510
would permit. In some cases, permissive disclosures for treatment,
payment or health care operations would also be limited. Since proposed
Sec. 164.510 is merely permissive, there would not be a conflict
between the program requirements, as it would be possible to comply
with both. However, it should be recognized that entities subject to
both sets of requirements would not have the total range of discretion
that the rules proposed below would suggest.

J. Compliance and Enforcement  (Sec. 164.522)

1. Compliance
[Please label written comments about this section with the subject:
``Compliance.'']
    The rules proposed below at Sec. 164.522 would establish several
requirements designed to enable the Secretary to monitor and seek to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this subpart. The general
philosophy of this section is to provide a cooperative approach to
obtaining compliance, including use of technical assistance and
informal means to resolve disputes. However, in recognition of the fact
that it would not always be possible to achieve compliance through
cooperation, the section also would provide the Secretary with tools
for carrying out her statutory mandate to achieve compliance.
    a. Principles for achieving compliance. Proposed Sec. 164.522(a)
would establish the principle that the Secretary will seek the
cooperation of covered entities in obtaining compliance. Section
164.522(a)(2) provides that the Secretary could provide technical
assistance to covered entities to help them come into compliance with
this subpart. It is clearly in the interests of both the covered
entities and the individuals they serve to minimize the costs of
compliance with the privacy standards. To the extent that the
Department could facilitate this by providing technical assistance, it
would endeavor to do so.
    b. Individual complaints and compliance reviews. We are proposing
in Sec. 164.522(b) that individuals have the right to file a complaint
with the Secretary if they believe that a covered plan or provider has
failed to comply with the requirements of this subpart. Because
individuals would have received notice, pursuant to proposed
Sec. 164.512, of the uses and disclosures that the entity could make
and of the entity's privacy practices, they would have a basis for
making a realistic judgment as to when a particular action or omission
would be improper. The notice would also inform individuals how they
could find out how to file such complaints. We thus consider the
proposed complaint right to be one that could realistically be
exercised by individuals, given the regulatory structure proposed.
    We are concerned about the burden that handling the potential
volume of such complaints would create for this Department, but we
recognize that such a complaint mechanism would provide helpful
information about the privacy practices of covered plans or providers
and could serve to identify particularly troublesome compliance
problems on an early basis.
    The procedures proposed in this section are modeled on those used
by the Department's Office for Civil Rights, although they would be
adapted to reflect the requirements of this subpart. We would require
complainants to identify the entities and describe the acts or
omissions alleged to be out of compliance and would require individuals
to file such complaints within 180 days of those acts or omissions. We
have tried to keep the requirements for filing complaints as minimal as
possible, to facilitate use of this right. The Secretary would also
attempt to keep the identity of complainants confidential, if possible.
However, we recognize that it could be necessary to disclose the
identity of complainants in order to investigate the substance of their
complaints, and the rules proposed below would permit such disclosures.
    The Secretary could promulgate alternative procedures for
complaints based on agency-specific concerns. For example, to protect
classified information, we may promulgate rules that would allow an
intelligence community agency to create a separate body within that
agency to receive complaints.
    The Secretary would try to resolve complaints on an informal basis
wherever possible. Where a resolution could not be reached, the
Secretary could make a formal finding of noncompliance. However,
resolution could occur, and an agreement reached with the covered
entity, even after a finding that a violation occurred. The Secretary
could use the finding as a basis to initiate an action under section
1176 of the Act or to refer the matter to the Department of Justice for
prosecution under section 1177 of the Act. It should be recognized that
the decision to initiate an action under either section of the law
would be a discretionary one, and proposed Sec. 164.522 would not
require such prosecutorial action to be taken. Proposed
Sec. 164.522(e)(1)(ii) would, however, permit the use of findings made
in connection with a complaint, group of complaints, or compliance
review to be acted on in this fashion.
    The rules proposed below also would provide that the Secretary
would inform both the covered plan or provider and the complainant,
whenever a decision was made on a complaint.
    We are proposing in Sec. 164.522(c) that the Secretary could
conduct compliance reviews to determine whether covered entities are in
compliance. A compliance review could be based on information
indicating a possible violation of this subpart even though a formal
complaint has not been filed. As is the case with a complaint
investigation, a compliance review may examine the policies, practices
or procedures of a covered entity and may result in voluntary
compliance or in a violation or no violation finding.
    c. Responsibilities of covered entities. Proposed Sec. 164.522(d)
establishes certain obligations for covered entities that would be
necessary to enable the Secretary to carry out her statutory role to
determine their compliance with these requirements. Proposed
Sec. 164.522(d)(1) would require covered entities to maintain records
as directed. Proposed Sec. 164.522(d)(2) would require them to
participate as required in compliance reviews. Proposed
Sec. 164.522(d)(3) would affirmatively establish their obligation to
provide information to the Secretary upon demand. Finally, paragraph
(d)(4) would prohibit intimidating, discriminatory or other retaliatory
actions by a covered entity against a person who files a complaint with
the Secretary; testifies, assists or participates in any manner in an
investigation, compliance review, proceeding, or hearing under this
Act; or opposes any act or practice made unlawful by this subpart. This
language is modeled after the Americans with Disabilities Act and title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Prohibitions against retaliation
are also common throughout Department programs. The experience of the
federal government in enforcing civil rights and other laws has been
that voluntary compliance with and effective enforcement of such laws
depend in large part on the initiative of persons opposed to illegal
practices. If retaliation for opposing practices that a person
reasonably believes are unlawful were permitted to go unremedied, it
would have a chilling effect upon the willingness of persons to speak
out and

[[Page 60003]]

to participate in administrative processes under this subpart.
    Opposition to practices of covered entities refers to a person's
communication of his or her good faith belief that a covered entity's
activities violate this subpart. Opposition includes, but is not
limited to, filing a complaint with the covered entity under
Sec. 164.518(d) and making a disclosure as a whistleblower under
Sec. 164.518(c)(4). This provision would not protect a person whose
manner of opposition is so unreasonable that it interferes with the
covered entities' legitimate activities. This provision would cover
such situations such as where an employee of a physician is fired in
retaliation for confronting the doctor regarding her practice of
illegally disclosing individuals' records or where a health plan drops
coverage after an enrollee argues to the plan that he has a right to
access to his records.
    We recognize that under these requirements the covered entity would
be disclosing protected health information to representatives of the
Department when such information is relevant to a compliance
investigation or assessment. We recognize that this would create a
mandatory disclosure of protected health information and that such a
requirement carries significant privacy concerns. Those concerns must,
however, be weighed against the need to obtain compliance by entities
with the privacy standards, and to protect against future improper uses
and disclosures of protected health information. The proposed rule
accordingly attempts to strike a balance between these interests,
providing that the Department would not disclose such information,
except as may be necessary to enable the Secretary to ascertain
compliance with this subpart or in enforcement proceedings or as
otherwise required by law.
2. Enforcement
    [Please label written comments about this section with the subject:
``Enforcement.'']
    Congress established a two-pronged approach to enforcement of all
of the requirements established under part C of title XI of the Act.
First, section 1176 grants the Secretary the authority to impose civil
monetary penalties against those covered entities which fail to comply
with the requirements established under part C. These penalties are to
be imposed according to the procedures established for imposition of
civil monetary penalties in section 1128A of the Act. Second, section
1177 establishes criminal penalties for certain wrongful disclosures of
individually identifiable health information.
    The selection of the civil monetary penalty process at section
1128A of the Act as the enforcement mechanism for the Administrative
Simplification standards and requirements indicates the type of process
Congress believes is appropriate for civil enforcement of those
standards and requirements. The Secretary's Recommendations call for a
privacy right of action to permit individuals to enforce their privacy
rights. However, the HIPAA does not provide a private right of action,
so the Secretary lacks the authority to provide for such a remedy.
Accordingly, we would provide that individuals could file complaints
with the Secretary and the Secretary could then, when appropriate,
investigate. The Secretary may also conduct compliance reviews. See
proposed Sec. 164.522(b) and (c).
    Under section 1177(a), the offense of ``wrongful disclosure'' is a
disclosure that violates the standards or requirements established
under part C. These would include any disclosures not otherwise
permitted under the privacy standards or the parallel security
standards.
    As we noted in the Notices of Proposed Rulemaking for the other
Administrative Simplification regulations, we will propose regulations
in the future to establish these procedures. Because such procedures
will not constitute ``standards'' within the meaning of part C, they
would not be subject to the delay in effective date provisions that
apply to the various Administrative Simplification regulations.

III. Small Business Assistance

    This rule is significant because it establishes for the first time
a federally required regime of information practices in the medical
industry. The length, and at times complexity, of the preamble
discussion may impress small businesses as creating overly burdensome
and costly requirements. We believe, however, that several features of
the rule, combined with initiatives by the Department and professional
associations, will make the rule easily administrable for the vast
majority of small businesses.
    First, a significant portion of the rule addresses the topic of
signed individual authorization for disclosure of health information--
the information that the authorization would include and when such an
authorization would be required. Importantly, no patient written
authorization would be required when information is disclosed for
purposes of treatment and payment and health care operations, or when
disclosure is mandated by law. In other words, doctors who disclose
patient health information only to other doctors for treatment
purposes, or to insurance companies to process payment, or for
operational purposes can continue to do so without any change in
current practices under this proposal. Only those covered entities who
disclose health information to marketers, reporters, private
investigators, researchers, and others for purposes unrelated to
treatment, payment, and health care operations are required to get the
written consent of the patient in accordance with this rule.
    Second, the Department plans to engage in outreach and education
programs to ease the implementation of this rule for small businesses.
Already, this rule provides model forms for getting patient
authorization and provides an example of a notice of information
practices (another requirement in the rule, described further below).
We also expect that professional associations will develop forms
tailored to specific groups' needs. The Department pledges to work with
professional associations to provide the greatest possible guidance to
small businesses covered by this rule.
    Third, in implementing this rule, we will apply the principle of
``scalability,'' so that a particular entity's characteristics--
including its size, type of business, and information practices--would
be relevant to how that entity adopts procedures to comply with this
rule. Take one example--this rule requires the designation of a
``privacy official.'' Large health plans dealing with a vast range of
information flows may well consider hiring a full time person to
oversee compliance with the rule, to assist in planning systems
development, and to draft contracts with business partners, among other
tasks. A small doctor's office, on the other hand, may instead
determine that an existing office manager could oversee the office's
privacy policies. There would be no expectation that this small
doctor's office hire a full-time privacy official. In each of these
examples, the covered entity would be complying with the rule's
requirement that a privacy official be designated--but the ways that
each complies would reflect the different circumstances of each
entity's practice.
    It is important for small businesses to understand what their
obligations would be and to implement the necessary procedures to
comply, with the help of Department's model forms and other resources
from professional associations. While most covered

[[Page 60004]]

entities would need to be in compliance within two years of the final
publication of the rule, small businesses would have an extra year to
come into compliance.
    Here, we set out the principal (although not exclusive)
requirements for small businesses:
1. Notice to Individuals of Information Practices  (Sec. 164.512)
    Each covered entity would have to develop a notice of information
practices, which, as described above, could be modeled on the form
attached to this proposal or on model forms that we expect professional
associations to develop. The notice must accurately reflect the
entity's practices and include the elements listed in Sec. 164.512.
    Covered health care providers would have to provide the notice to
individuals at first service after the effective date of the rule.
Providers are also required to post a current copy of the notice in a
clear and prominent location for individuals to see. Covered health
plans would have to provide the notice to any individual covered by the
plan when this rule becomes effective, at enrollment, and after any
material change to the notice or at least once every three years.
2. Access of Individuals to Protected Health Information
(Sec. 164.514)
    Covered plans and providers would be required to allow individuals
to inspect and copy their protected health information. These plans or
providers could charge individuals a reasonable cost-based fee for
copying.
3. Accounting for Uses and Disclosures  (Sec. 164.515)
    Covered plans and providers would have to be able to provide an
accounting for uses and disclosures of protected health information for
purposes other than treatment, payment, or health care operations. We
expect that this burden will be very low for most small businesses,
given the nature of most disclosures by such businesses.
4. Amendment and Correction  (Sec. 164.516)
    Covered plans and providers would be required to allow individuals
to request amendments or corrections to their protected health
information.
5. Designated Privacy Official  (Sec. 164.518(a))
    Each covered entity would designate a privacy official. As
described above, in a small providers office, the office manager may be
the official in charge of making sure that the office is implementing
its privacy policies and procedures and taking complaints.
6. Training  (Sec. 164.518(b))
    All members of covered entities' workforces who have contact with
protected health information would be required to have some sort of
privacy training about the entity's policies and procedures and to sign
a certificate indicating that they had such training. For a small
entity, this could simply mean the privacy official briefly discussing
how they handle privacy concerns and going over the entity's notice of
information practices.
7. Safeguards  (Sec. 164.518(c))
    A covered entity would have to establish administrative, technical,
and physical safeguards to protect the privacy of protected health
information from unauthorized access or use. For a small provider, this
may mean having the ability to securely lock up any record that are not
being used and ensuring that records are not kept in an area where
anyone who is not authorized could view them.
8. Complaints  (Sec. 164.518(d))
    Every covered entity would be required to have policies and
procedures in place that allow individuals to file complaints about
possible privacy violations. For a small entity, this could mean simply
that they keep a specific file for complaints.
9. Sanctions  (Sec. 164.518(e))
    Covered entities would be required to develop and apply sanctions
when a member of a covered entity's work force or business partner
fails to comply with the entity's policies and procedures related to
this rule. For a small businesses, these could range from requiring a
re-training on privacy, to placing a notation of the violation in an
employee's record, to dismissal or ending a contract with a business
partner.
10. Documentation of Policies and Procedures  (Secs. 164.520)
    Covered entities would be required to document policies and
procedures for use and disclosure of protected health information
relating to this regulation, including elements listed in Sec. 164.520,
and would need to maintain one copy of each version of its notice of
information practices, and authorization forms. See Sec. 164.520(f) for
a full list of recordkeeping requirements.
11. Minimum Necessary  (Sec. 164.506(b))
    When using or disclosing protected health information for
treatment, payment, healthcare operations, and other purposes, an
entity would be required to disclose only the amount of protected
health information necessary to accomplish the intended purpose of the
use or disclosure.
12. Business Partners  (Sec. 164.506(e))
    For those small businesses that hire ``business partners'' to
assist them in carrying out their operations, this rule would require
that they take steps, including having certain terms in a contract, to
ensure that their business partners are also protecting the privacy of
individually identifiable health information. We expect that model
contracts will be developed by potential business partners and others
that can be used to fulfill the requirements of this section.
13. Special Disclosures That Do Not Require Authorization--Public
Health, Research, etc.  (Sec. 164.510)
    This proposed rule would also permit disclosure of patients' health
information in special cases and under certain conditions. These
disclosures would be optional under this proposed rule but may be
mandatory under other laws. The primary examples of such permissible
disclosures are for: public health purposes, for health oversight
purposes, for judicial and administrative proceedings, to coroners and
medical examiners, to law enforcement agencies, to next-of-kin, to
governmental health data systems, for research purposes, other
disclosures required by law, among others. Each of these disclosures
and uses would be subject to specific conditions, described in the
proposed rule.
14. Verification  (Sec. 164.518(c)(2))
    Entities would be required to have reasonable procedures to verify
the identity or authority, as applicable, of persons requesting the
disclosure of protected health information if the person making the
request is not already known to the entity. In most cases, the covered
entity could simply ask for a form of identification like a drivers
license.

IV. Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis

    Section 804(2) of title 5, United States Code (as added by section
251 of Public Law 104-121), specifies that a ``major rule'' is any rule
that the Office of Management and Budget finds is likely to result in--
    <bullet> An annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more;
    <bullet> A major increase in costs or prices for consumers,
individual industries,

[[Page 60005]]

Federal, State, or local government agencies, or geographic regions; or
    <bullet> Significant adverse effects in competition, employment,
investment productivity, innovation, or on the ability of Unites States
based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic
and export markets.
    We estimate that the impact of this final rule will be over $1
billion in the first year of implementation. Therefore, this rule is a
major rule as defined in Title 5, United States Code, section 804(2).
    DHHS has examined the impacts of this proposed rule under Executive
Order 12866. Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs
and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, when regulation
is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net
benefits (including potential economic, environmental, public health
and safety effects; distributive impacts; and equity). According to
Executive Order 12866, a regulatory action is ``significant'' if it
meets any one of a number of specified conditions, including having an
annual effect on the economy of $100 million or adversely affecting in
a material way a sector of the economy, competition, or jobs or if it
raises novel legal or policy issues. DHHS finds that this proposed rule
is a significant regulatory action as defined by Executive Order 12866.
Also in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order 12866, this
proposed rule was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget.
    When this proposed rule becomes a final rule, in accordance with
the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement and Fairness Act (Pub. L.
104-121), the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs of the Office of Management and Budget (the Administrator) has
determined that this proposed rule would be a major rule for the
purpose of congressional review. A major rule for this purpose is
defined in 5 U.S.C. 804(2) as one that the Administrator has determined
has resulted or is likely to result in an annual effect on the economy
of $100 million or more; a major increase in costs or prices for
consumers, individual industries, federal State, or local government
agencies, or geographic regions; or significant adverse effects on
competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on
the ability of U.S.-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based
enterprises in domestic or export markets.
    The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA) projects a significant increase in the number of medical
transactions that will be conducted or transmitted electronically.
HIPAA notes the privacy needs that result when individually
identifiable health information can be transmitted quickly through
electronic information systems. While there is a compelling need to
protect the privacy of health information in today's health care
system, the expected growth of electronic systems to aide medical
diagnostics, claims processing and research makes it even more critical
to improve privacy protections.
    A fundamental assumption of this regulation is that the greatest
benefits of improved privacy protection will be realized in the future
as patients gain increasing trust in health care practitioners' ability
to maintain the confidentiality of their health information.
Furthermore, our analysis rests on the principle that health
information privacy is a right, and as such, cannot be valued solely by
market costs. Because it is difficult to measure future benefits based
on present data, our estimates of the costs and benefits of this
regulation are based on the current business environment and do not
include projections beyond five years. As a result, we cannot
accurately account for all of the regulation's future costs and
benefits, but the Department is confident that future benefits will be
higher than those stated in this analysis.
    In order to achieve a reasonable level of privacy protection, we
have three objectives for the proposed rule: (1) To establish baseline
standards for health care privacy protection, (2) to establish
protection for all health information maintained or transmitted by
covered entities, and (3) to protect the privacy of health information
that is maintained in electronic form, as well as health information
generated by electronic systems.
    Establishing minimum standards for health care privacy protection
is an attempt to create a baseline level of privacy protection for
patients across States. The Health Privacy Project's report, The State
of Health Privacy: An Uneven Terrain <SUP>6</SUP> makes it clear that
under the current system of state laws, privacy protection is extremely
variable. Our statutory authority under HIPAA allows us to preempt
state laws when state law provides less stringent privacy protection
than the regulation. Only in cases where state law does not protect the
patient's health information as stringently as in this proposed rule,
or when state law is more restrictive of a patient's right to access
their own health care information, will our rule preempt state law. We
discuss preemption in greater detail in other parts of the preamble
(see the effects of the rule on state laws, section 2 below).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \6\ Janlori Goldman, Institute for Health Care Research and
Policy, Georgetown University: www.healthprivacy.org/resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Our second objective is to establish a uniform base of protection
for all health information maintained or transmitted by covered
entities. As discussed in the preamble, HIPAA restricts the type of
entities covered by the proposed rule to three broad categories: health
care providers, health care clearinghouses, and health plans. However,
there are similar public and private entities that we do not have the
authority to regulate under HIPAA. For example, life insurance
companies are not covered by this proposed rule but have access to a
large amount of protected health information. State government agencies
not directly linked to public health functions or health oversight may
also have access to protected health information. Examples of this type
of agency include the motor vehicle administration, which frequently
maintains individual health information, and welfare agencies that
routinely hold health information about their clients.
    Our third objective is to protect the privacy of health information
that is maintained in electronic form, as well as health information
generated by electronic systems. Health information is currently stored
and transmitted in multiple forms, including in electronic, paper, and
oral formats. In order to provide consistent protection to information
that has been electronically transmitted or maintained, we propose that
this rule cover all personal, protected health information that has
ever been maintained or transmitted electronically. This type of
information includes output such as computer printouts, X-rays,
magnetic tape, and other information that was originally maintained or
transmitted electronically. For example, laboratory tests are often
computer generated, printed out on paper, and then stored in a
patient's record. Because such lab results were originally maintained
electronically, the post-electronic (i.e. printed) output of those lab
results would also be covered under the proposed rule.
    It is important to note that the use of electronic systems to
maintain and transmit health information is growing among health care
providers, and health plans. Faulkner and Gray report that provider use
of electronically processed

[[Page 60006]]

health transactions grew from 47 percent to 62 percent between 1994 and
1998. Payer use of electronic transactions grew 17 percent between 1996
and 1997. Once all of the HIPAA administrative simplification standards
are implemented, we expect the number of electronic transactions
processed by payers and providers to grow.
    The variation in business practice regarding use of paper records
versus electronic media for storing and transmitting health information
is captured by comparing the percentage of providers that submit paper
claims with those that submit electronic claims. Faulkner & Gray's
Health Data Directory <SUP>1</SUP> shows that only 40 percent of non-
Medicare physician claims and 16 percent of dental claims were
submitted electronically in 1998. In contrast, 88 percent of all
pharmacy claims were submitted electronically.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\  Health Data Directory, Faulkner & Gray; 1999 Edition, pp
22-23.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    We believe that most physicians either have, or will have in the
near future, the capacity to submit claims electronically. Faulkner and
Gray reported that 81 percent of physicians with Medicare patients
submitted their Medicare claims electronically. The difference in the
percent of electronic clams submitted to Medicare suggests that the
physicians' decisions to submit claims electronically may be heavily
influenced by the administrative requirements of the health plan
receiving the claim. Since HIPAA requires all health plans to accept
electronic transactions and, in order to compete in the technologically
driven health care market, more health plans may require electronic
claims submissions, physicians will conduct many more electronic
transactions in the near future. Therefore, it is extremely important
that adequate privacy protections are implemented now.

A. Relationship of This Analysis to Analyses in Other HIPAA Regulations

    Historically, Congress has recognized that privacy standards must
accompany the electronic data interchange standards and that the
increased ease of transmitting and sharing individually identifiable
health information must be accompanied by an increase in the privacy
and confidentiality. In fact, the majority of the bulk of the first
Administrative Simplification section that was debated on the floor of
the Senate in 1994 (as part of the Health Security Act) was made up of
privacy provisions. Although the requirement for the issuance of
concomitant privacy standards remained a part of the bill passed by the
House of Representatives, the requirement for privacy standards was
removed in conference. This section was moved from the standard-setting
authority of Title XI (section 1173 of the Act) and placed in a
separate section of HIPAA, section 264. Subsection (b) of section 264
required the Secretary of HHS to develop and submit to the Congress
recommendations for:
    (1) The rights that an individual who is a subject of individually
identifiable health information should have.
    (2) The procedures that should be established for the exercise of
such rights.
    (3) The uses and disclosures of such information that should be
authorized or required.
    The Secretary's Recommendations were submitted to the Congress on
September 11, 1997, and are summarized below. Section 264(c)(1)
provides that:

    If legislation governing standards with respect to the privacy
of individually identifiable health information transmitted in
connection with the transactions described in section 1173(a) of the
Social Security Act (as added by section 262) is not enacted by
(August 21, 1999), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
promulgate final regulations containing such standards not later
than (February 21, 2000). Such regulations shall address at least
the subjects described in subsection (b).

    As the Congress did not enact legislation governing standards with
respect to the privacy of individually identifiable health information
prior to August 21, 1999, HHS has now, in accordance with this
statutory mandate, developed proposed rules setting forth standards to
protect the privacy of such information.
    These privacy standards have been, and continue to be, an integral
part of the suite of Administrative Simplification standards intended
to simplify and improve the efficiency of the administration of our
health care system.
    The proposed rule should be considered along with all of the
administrative simplification standards required by HIPAA. We assessed
several strategies for determining the impact of this proposed rule. We
considered whether it would be accurate to view the impact as a subset
of the overall HIPAA standards or whether this privacy component should
be viewed as an addition to the earlier impact analyses related to
HIPAA. We decided that while this proposed rule is considered one of
the HIPAA standards, any related costs or benefits should be viewed as
an addition to earlier analyses. The original HIPAA analyses did not
incorporate the expected costs and benefits of privacy regulation
because, at the time of the original analyses, we did not know whether
Congress would enact legislation or whether privacy would need to be
addressed by regulation. Therefore, much of our cost analysis is based
on the expected incremental costs above those related to other HIPAA
regulations.

B. Summary of Costs and Benefits.

    The Department has estimated the costs and benefits of the proposed
rule based on several caveats. In general, it is difficult to estimate
the costs and benefits of improved privacy protection. The ability to
measure costs of the proposed regulation is limited because there is
very little data currently available on the cost of privacy protection.
The Department has not been able to estimate costs for a number of
requirements of the proposed regulation that we know will impose some
cost to covered entities. For those elements for which there are
estimated costs, data and information limitations limit the precision
of the Department's estimates; for those reasons we have provided an
overall range of costs in addition to point estimates, and welcome
further information from the public as part of the comment process.
Furthermore, the number of new privacy requirements that the regulation
will introduce to the health care industry exacerbates difficulties
estimating the benefits of privacy. Benefits are difficult to measure
because we conceive of privacy primarily as a right and secondarily as
a commodity. As discussed below, the significant benefits of the
proposed regulation to individuals and society can be demonstrated by
illustrating the serious privacy concerns raised by mental health,
substance abuse, cancer screening, and HIV/AIDS patients and the
benefits that may be derived from greater privacy.
    The estimated cost of compliance with the proposed rule would be at
least $3.8 billion over five years. The cost includes estimates for the
majority of the requirements of the proposed regulation, but not all.
These estimates include costs to federal, State, and local governments.
Federal, and State and local costs are therefore a subset of total
costs. Based on a plausible range of costs for the key components of
the analysis, the cost of the regulation would likely be in the range
$1.8 to $6.3 billion over five years (not including those elements of
the regulation for

[[Page 60007]]

which we could not make any cost estimates).
    The compliance costs are in addition to Administrative
Simplification estimates. The cost of complying with the privacy
regulation represents about 0.09 percent of projected national health
expenditures during the first year following the regulation's
enactment. The five-year cost of the proposed regulation also
represents 1.0 percent of the increase in health care costs that will
occur during the same five-year period.<SUP>8</SUP>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \8\ Health Care Finance Administration, Office of the Actuary,
1997.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The largest cost item is the amending and correcting of records,
which would represent over one-half of total costs. Provider and plan
notices, which we estimate would cost $439 million, is the second
largest cost, and inspection and copying of records is estimated to be
$405 million. The one-time costs for providers to develop policies and
procedures represent somewhat less than 10 percent of the total cost,
or $333 million. Plans would bear a substantially smaller cost--
approximately $62 million. Other systems changes would cost about $90
million over the period. The cost of administering written
authorizations would total approximately $271 million over five years.
    The cost estimates include private-and public-sector costs. Many of
the public-sector cost elements will be the same as those in the
private market. However, privacy notices are likely to represent a
smaller fraction of total public-sector costs, while systems compliance
costs in the public sector may be higher than in the private sector due
to oversight and administrative requirements.
    The costs presented in this document are the Department's best
estimates of the cost of implementing the proposed regulation based on
available information and data. Because of inadequate data, we have not
made cost estimates for the following components of the regulation: The
principle of minimum necessary disclosure; the requirement that
entities monitor business partners with whom they share PHI; creation
of de-identified information; internal complaint processes; sanctions;
compliance and enforcement; the designation of a privacy official and
creation of a privacy board; and additional requirements on research/
optional disclosures that will be imposed by the regulation. The cost
of these provisions may be significant in some cases, but it would be
inaccurate to project costs for these requirements given the fact that
several of these concepts are new to the industry, and there is little
direct evidence on costs. We solicit comment regarding costs of the
regulation that we have not quantified.
    The privacy protections established by this regulation will provide
major social benefits. Establishing privacy protection as a fundamental
right is an important goal and will have significant, non-quantifiable
social benefits. A well-designed privacy standard can be expected to
build confidence among the public about the confidentiality of their
health information. Increased confidence in the privacy of an
individual's health information can be expected to increase the
likelihood that many people will seek treatment for particular classes
of disease, particularly mental health conditions, sexually transmitted
diseases such as HIV/AIDS, and earlier screening for certain cancers.
The increased utilization of medical services that would result from
increased confidence in privacy would lead to improved health for the
individuals involved, reduced costs to society associated with delayed
treatments, and improved public health attributable to reduced
transmission of communicable diseases.

                      Table 1.--The Cost of Complying with the Proposed Privacy Regulation
                                                  [In dollars]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Initial or first    Annual cost after   Five year (2000-
                      Provision                        year cost (2000)     the first year        2004) cost
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Development of Policies and Procedures--Providers           $333,000,000  ..................        $333,000,000
 (totaling 871,294).................................
Development of Policies and Procedures--Plans                 62,000,000  ..................          62,000,000
 (totaling 18,225)..................................
System Changes--All Entities........................          90,000,000  ..................          90,000,000
Notice Development Cost--All Entities...............          20,000,000  ..................          30,000,000
Notice Issuance--Providers..........................          59,730,000          37,152,000         208,340,000
Notice Issuance--Plans..............................          46,200,000          46,200,000         231,000,000
Inspection/Copying..................................          81,000,000          81,000,000         405,000,000
Amendment/Correction................................         407,000,000         407,000,000       2,035,000,000
Written Authorization...............................          54,300,000          54,300,000         271,500,000
Paperwork/Training..................................          22,000,000          22,000,000         110,000,000
Other Costs*........................................               **N/E                 N/E                 N/E
                                                     -----------------------------------------------------------
    Total...........................................      $1,165,230,000        $647,652,000      $3,775,840,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Other Costs include: minimum necessary disclosure; monitoring business partners with whom entities share PHI;
  creation of de-identified information; internal complaint processes; sanctions; compliance and enforcement;
  the designation of a privacy official and creation of a privacy board; additional requirements on research/
  optional disclosures that will be imposed by the regulation.
**N/E = ``Not estimated''.

    We promote the view that privacy protection is an important
personal right, and suggest that the greatest of the benefits of the
proposed regulation are impossible to estimate based on the market
value of health information alone. However, it is possible to evaluate
some of the benefits that may accrue to individuals as a result of
proposed regulation, and these benefits, alone, demonstrate that the
regulation is warranted.
    These benefits are considered both qualitatively and
quantitatively. As a framework for the discussion, the cost of the
provisions in the regulation that have been quantified is $0.46 per
health care encounter. Although the value of privacy cannot be fully
calculated, it is worth noting that if individuals would be willing to
pay more than $0.46 per health care encounter to improve health
information privacy, the benefits of the

[[Page 60008]]

proposed regulation would outweigh the cost.
    Several qualitative examples illustrate the benefits of the
proposed regulation. In one case, medical privacy concerns may prevent
patients from obtaining early testing and screening for certain types
of cancer. Of types of cancer for which screening is available,
survival rates might increase to 95 percent diagnosed in the early
stages <SUP>9</SUP>. For HIV/AIDS patients, new treatments for patients
who are diagnosed with HIV in the early stages may save $23,700 per
quality-adjusted year of life saved <SUP>10</SUP>. Later in this
document, the potential to reduce illness and disability associated
with sexually transmitted diseases is discussed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \9\  American Cancer Society. http://www.cancer.org/statistics/
97cff/97facts.html
    \10\  John Hornberger et al, ``Early treatment with highly
active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) is cost-effective compared to
delayed treatment,'' 12th World AIDS conference, 1998.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    We recognize that many of the costs and benefits of health
information privacy are difficult to quantify, but we believe that our
estimates represent a reasonable range of the economic costs and
benefits associated with the regulation.

C. Need for the Proposed Action.

    Privacy is a fundamental right. As such, it has to be viewed
differently than any ordinary economic good. Although the costs and
benefits of a regulation need to be considered as a means of
identifying and weighing options, it is important not to lose sight of
the inherent meaning of privacy: it speaks to our individual and
collective freedom.
    A right to privacy in personal information has historically found
expression in American law. All fifty states today recognize in tort
law a common law or statutory right to privacy. Many states
specifically provide a remedy for public revelation of private facts.
Some states, such as California and Tennessee, have a right to privacy
as a matter of state constitutional law. The multiple historical
sources for legal rights to privacy are traced in many places,
including Chapter 13 of Alan Westin's Privacy and Freedom and in Ellen
Alderman & Caroline Kennedy, The Right to Privacy (1995).
    To take but one example, the Fourth Amendment to the United States
Constitution guarantees that ``the right of the people to be secure in
their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable
searches and seizures, shall not be violated.'' By referring to the
need for security of ``persons'' as well as ``papers and effects'' the
Fourth Amendment suggests enduring values in American law that relate
to privacy. The need for security of ``persons'' is consistent with
getting patient consent before performing invasive medical procedures.
The need for security in ``papers and effects'' underscores the
importance of protecting information about the person, contained in
sources such as personal diaries, medical records, or elsewhere. As is
generally true for the right of privacy in information, the right is
not absolute. The test instead is what constitutes an ``unreasonable''
search of the papers and effects.
    The United States Supreme Court has specifically upheld the
constitutional protection of personal health information. In Whalen v.
Roe, 429 U.S. 589 (1977), the Court analyzed a New York statute that
created a database of persons who obtained drugs for which there was
both a lawful and unlawful market. The Court, in upholding the statute,
recognized at least two different kinds of interests within the
constitutionally protected ``zone of privacy.'' ``One is the individual
interest in avoiding disclosure of personal matters,'' such as this
proposed regulation principally addresses. This interest in avoiding
disclosure, discussed in Whalen in the context of medical information,
was found to be distinct from a different line of cases concerning
``the interest in independence in making certain kinds of important
decisions.'' In the recent case of Jaffee v. Redmond, 116 S.Ct. 1923
(1996), the Supreme Court held that statements made to a therapist
during a counseling session were protected against civil discovery
under the Federal Rules of Evidence. The Court noted that all fifty
states have adopted some form of the psychotherapist-patient privilege.
In upholding the federal privilege, the Supreme Court stated that it
``serves the public interest by facilitating the appropriate treatment
for individuals suffering the effects of a mental or emotional problem.
The mental health of our citizenry, no less than its physical health,
is a public good of transcendent importance.''
    Many writers have urged a philosophical or common-sense right to
privacy in one's personal information. Examples include Alan Westin,
Privacy and Freedom (1967) and Janna Malamud Smith, Private Matters: In
Defense of the Personal Life (1997). These writings emphasize the link
between privacy and freedom and privacy and the ``personal life,'' or
the ability to develop one's own personality and self-expression.
Smith, for instance, states:

    The bottom line is clear. If we continually, gratuitously,
reveal other people's privacies, we harm them and ourselves, we
undermine the richness of the personal life, and we fuel a social
atmosphere of mutual exploitation. Let me put it another way: Little
in life is as precious as the freedom to say and do things with
people you love that you would not say or do if someone else were
present. And few experiences are as fundamental to liberty and
autonomy as maintaining control over when, how, to whom, and where
you disclose personal material. Id. at 240-241.

    Individuals' right to privacy in information about themselves is
not absolute. It does not, for instance, prevent reporting of public
health information on communicable diseases or stop law enforcement
from getting information when due process has been observed. But many
people believe that individuals should have some right to control
personal and sensitive information about themselves.
    Among different sorts of personal information, health information
is among the most sensitive. Many people believe that details about
their physical self should not generally be put on display for
neighbors, employers, and government officials to see. Informed consent
laws place limits on the ability of other persons to intrude physically
on a person's body. Similar concerns apply to intrusions on information
about the person. Moving beyond these facts of physical treatment,
there is likely a greater intrusion when the medical records reveal
details about a person's mental state, such as during treatment for
mental health. If, in Justice Brandeis' words, the ``right to be let
alone'' means anything, then it likely applies to having outsiders have
access to one's intimate thoughts, words, and emotions.
    In addition to these arguments based on the right to privacy in
personal information, market failures will arise to the extent that
privacy is less well protected than the parties would have agreed to,
if they were fully informed and had the ability to monitor and enforce
contracts. The chief market failures with respect to privacy concern
information, negotiating, and enforcement costs. The information costs
arise because of the information asymmetry between the company and the
patient--the company typically knows far more than the patient about
how the information will be used by that company. A health care
provider or plan, for instance, knows many details about how protected
health information will be generated, combined with other databases, or
sold to third parties.

[[Page 60009]]

    Patients face at least two layers of cost in learning about how
their information is used. First, as with many aspects of health care,
patients face the challenge of trying to understand technical medical
terminology and practices. It will often be difficult for a patient to
understand the medical records and the implications of transferring
various parts of such records to a third party. Second, especially in
the absence of consistent national rules, patients may face significant
costs in trying to learn and understand the nature of a company's
privacy policies.
    The costs of learning about companies' policies are magnified by
the difficulty patients face in detecting whether companies in fact are
complying with those policies. Patients might try to adopt strategies
for monitoring whether companies have complied with their announced
policies. For instance, if a person received health care from several
providers that promised not to sell her name to third parties, she
could report a different middle initial to each provider. She could
then identify the provider that broke the agreement by noticing the
middle initials that later appeared on an unsolicited marketing letter.
These sorts of strategies, however, are both costly (in time and
effort) and likely to be ineffective. A company using the patient's
name, for instance, could cross-check her address with her real name,
and thereby insert the correct middle initial. In addition, modern
health care often requires protected health information to flow
legitimately among multiple entities for purposes of treatment,
payment, health care operations, and other necessary uses. Even if the
patient could identify the provider whose data ultimately leaked, the
patient could not easily tell which of those multiple entities had
impermissibly transferred her information.
    The cost and ineffectiveness of monitoring logically leads to less
than optimal protection of health information. Consider the incentives
facing a company that acquires protected health information. That
company gains the full benefit of using the information, including in
its own marketing efforts or in the fee it can receive when it sells
the information to third parties. The company, however, does not suffer
the full losses from disclosure of protected health information.
Because of imperfect monitoring, customers often will not learn of, and
thus not be able to enforce against, that unauthorized use. They will
not be able to discipline the company efficiently in the marketplace
for its less-than-optimal privacy practices. Because the company
internalizes the gains from using the information, but does not bear a
significant share of the cost to patients (in terms of lost privacy),
it will have a systematic incentive to over-use protected health
information. In market failure terms, companies will have an incentive
to use protected health information where the patient would not have
freely agreed to such use.
    These difficulties in contract enforcement are made worse by the
third-party nature of many health insurance and payment systems. Even
where individuals would wish to bargain for privacy, they may lack the
legal standing to do so. For instance, employers often negotiate the
terms of health plans with insurers. The employee may have no voice in
the privacy or other terms of the plan, facing a take-it-or-leave-it
choice of whether to be covered by insurance. The incentive of
employers may be contrary to the wishes of employees--employers may in
some cases inappropriately insist on having access to sensitive medical
information in order to monitor employees' behavior and health status.
In light of these complexities, there are likely significant market
failures in the bargaining on privacy protection. Many privacy-
protective agreements that patients would wish to make, absent barriers
to bargaining, will not be reached. The economic, legal and
philosophical arguments become more compelling as the medical system
shifts from predominantly paper to predominantly electronic records.
From an economic perspective, market failures will arise to the extent
that privacy is less well protected than the parties would have agreed
to, if they were fully informed and had some equality of bargaining
power. The chief market failures with respect to privacy concern
information and bargaining costs. The information costs arise because
of the information asymmetry between the company and the patient--the
company typically knows far more than the patient about how the
information will be used by that company. A health care provider or
plan, for instance, knows many details about how protected health
information will be generated, combined with other databases, or sold
to third parties.
    Rapid changes in information technology mean that the size of the
market failures will likely increase greatly in the markets for
personal health information. Improvements in computers and networking
mean that the costs of gathering, analyzing, and disseminating
electronic data are plunging. Market forces are leading many medical
providers and plans to shift from paper to electronic records, due both
to lower cost and the increased functionality provided by having
information in electronic form. These market changes will be
accelerated by the administrative simplification implemented by the
other regulations promulgated under HIPAA. A chief goal of
administrative simplification, in fact, is to create a more efficient
flow of medical information where appropriate. This proposed privacy
regulation is an integral part of the overall effort of administrative
simplification; it creates a framework for more efficient flows for
certain purposes, including treatment and payment, while restricting
flows in other circumstances except where appropriate institutional
safeguards exist.
    If the medical system shifts to predominantly electronic records in
the near future, without use of accompanying privacy rules, then one
can imagine a near future where clerical and medical workers all over
the country may be able to pull up protected health information about
individuals--without meaningful patient consent and without effective
institutional controls against further dissemination. In terms of the
market failure, it will become more difficult for patients to know how
their health provider or plan is using their personal health
information. It will become more difficult to monitor the subsequent
flows of protected health information, as the number of electronic
flows and possible points of leakage both increase. Similarly, the
costs and difficulties of bargaining to get the patients' desired level
of use will likely rise due the greater number and types of entities
that receive protected health information.
    As the benefits section, below, discusses in more detail, the
protection of privacy and correcting the market failure have practical
implications. Where patients are concerned about lack of privacy
protections, they might fail to get medical treatment that they would
otherwise seek. This failure to get treatment may be especially likely
for certain conditions, including mental health, substance abuse, and
conditions such as HIV. Similarly, patients who are concerned about
lack of privacy protections may report inaccurately to their providers
when they do seek treatment. For instance, they might decide not to
mention that they are taking prescription drugs that indicate that they
have an embarrassing condition. These inaccurate reports may lead to
mis-diagnosis and less-than-optimal treatment, including

[[Page 60010]]

inappropriate additional medications. In short, the lack of privacy
safeguards can lead to efficiency losses in the form of foregone or
inappropriate treatment.
    The shift from paper to electronic records, with the accompanying
greater flows of sensitive health information, also strengthens the
arguments for giving legal protection to the right to privacy in
protected health information. In an earlier period where it was far
more expensive to access and use medical records, the risk of harm to
individuals was relatively low. In the potential near future, where
technology makes it almost free to send lifetime medical records over
the Internet, the risks may grow rapidly. It may become cost-effective,
for instance, for companies to offer services that allow purchasers to
obtain details of a person's physical and mental treatments. In
addition to legitimate possible uses for such services, malicious or
inquisitive persons may download medical records for purposes ranging
from identity theft to embarrassment to prurient interest in the life
of a celebrity or neighbor. Of additional concern, such services might
extend to providing detailed genetic information about individuals,
without their consent. Many persons likely believe that they have a
right to live in society without having these details of their lives
laid open to unknown and possibly hostile eyes. These technological
changes, in short, may provide a reason for institutionalizing privacy
protections in situations where the risk of harm did not previously
justify writing such protections into law.
    States have, to varying degrees, attempted to enhance
confidentiality and correct the market problems by establishing laws
governing at least some aspects of medical record privacy. This
approach, though a step in the right direction, is inadequate. The
states themselves have a patch quilt of laws that fail to provide a
consistent or comprehensive policy, and there is considerable variation
among the states in the scope of the protections provided. Moreover,
health data is becoming increasingly ``national''; as more information
becomes available in electronic form, it can have value far beyond the
immediate community where the patient resides. Neither private action
nor state laws provide a sufficiently rigorous legal structure to
correct the market failure now or in the future. Hence, a national
policy with consistent rules is a vital step toward correcting the
market failure that exists.
    In summarizing the need for the proposed regulation, the discussion
here has emphasized how the proposed regulation would address
violations of a right to privacy in the information about oneself,
market failures, and the need for a national policy. These arguments
become considerably stronger with the shift from predominantly paper to
predominantly electronic records. Other arguments could supplement
these justifications. As discussed in the benefits section below, the
proposed privacy protections may prevent or reduce the risk of unfair
treatment or discrimination against vulnerable categories of persons,
such as those who are HIV positive, and thereby, foster better health.
The proposed regulation may also help educate providers, plans, and the
general public about how protected health information is used. This
education, in turn, may lead to better information practices in the
future.
    Clearly, the growing problem of protecting privacy is widely
understood and a major public concern. Over 80 percent of persons
surveyed in 1999 agreed with the statement that they had ``lost all
control over their personal information.'' A Wall Street Journal/NBC
poll on September 16, 1999 asked Americans what concerned them most in
the coming century. ``Loss of personal privacy'' topped the list, as
the first or second concern of 29 percent of respondents. Other issues
such as terrorism, world war, and global warming had scores of 23
percent or less. The regulation is a major step toward addressing this
public concern.

D. Baseline Privacy Protections

    Determining the impact of the rule on covered entities requires us
to establish a baseline for current privacy policies. We must first
determine current practices and requirements related to protected
information--specifically, practices related to disclosure and use,
notification of individuals of information practices, inspection and
copying, amendment and correction, administrative policies, procedures,
and related documentation.
    Privacy practices are most often shaped by professional
organizations that publish ethical codes of conduct and by State law.
On occasion, State laws defer to professional conduct codes. At
present, where neither professional organizations nor States have
developed guidelines for privacy practices, an entity may implement
privacy practices independently.
    Professional codes of conduct or ethical behavior generally can be
found as opinions and guidelines developed by organizations such as the
American Medical Association, the American Hospital Association, and
the American Dental Association. These are generally issued though an
organization's governing body. The codes do not have the force of law,
but providers often recognize them as binding rules.
    State laws are another important means of protecting health
information. While professional codes of conduct usually only have
slight variations, State laws vary dramatically. Some States defer to
the professional codes of conduct, others provide general guidelines
for privacy protection, and others provide detailed requirements
relating to the protection of information relating to specific diseases
or to entire classes of information. In cases where neither State law
nor professional ethical standards exist, the only privacy protection
individuals have is limited to the policies and standards that the
health care entity adopts.
    Before we can attempt to determine the impact of the proposed rule
on covered entities, we must make an effort to establish the present
level of privacy protection. Current privacy protection practices are
determined by the standards and practices that the professional
associations have adopted for their members and by State laws.
1. Professional Codes of Conduct and the Protection of Health
Information
    We examined statements issued by five major professional groups,
one national electronic network association and a leading managed care
association. There are a number of common themes that all the
organizations appear to subscribe to:
    <bullet> The need to maintain and protect an individual's health
information;
    <bullet> Development of policies to ensure the confidentiality of
protected health information;
    <bullet> Only the minimum necessary information should be released
to accomplish the purpose for which the information is sought.
    Beyond these principles, the major associations differ with respect
to the methods used to protect health information. One critical area of
difference is the extent to which professional organizations should
release protected health information. A major mental health association
advocates the release of identifiable patient information ``* * * only
when de-identified data are inadequate for the purpose at hand.'' A
major association of physicians counsels members who use electronically
maintained and transmitted data to require that they and their patients
know in advance who has access to protected patient data, and the
purposes for which the data will be

[[Page 60011]]

used. In another document, the association advises physicians not to
``sell'' patient information to data collection companies without fully
informing their patients of this practice and receiving authorization
in advance to release of the information.
    Only two of the five professional groups state that patients have
the right to review their medical records. One group declares this as a
fundamental patient right, while the second association qualifies their
position by stating that the physician has the final word on a
patient's access to their health information. This association also
recommends that its members respond to requests for access to patient
information within 10 days, and recommends that entities allow for an
appeal process when patients are denied access. The association further
recommends that when a patient contests the accuracy of the information
in their record and the entity refuses to accept the patient's change,
the patient's statement should be included as a permanent part of the
patient's record.
    In addition, three of the five professional groups endorse the
maintenance of audit trails that can track the history of disclosures
of protected health information.
    The one set of standards that we reviewed from a health network
association advocated the protection of private health information from
disclosure without patient authorization and emphasized that encrypting
information should be a principal means of protecting patient
information. The statements of a leading managed care association,
while endorsing the general principles of privacy protection, were
vague on the release of information for purposes other than treatment.
They suggest allowing the use of protected health information without
the patient's authorization for what they term ``health promotion.'' It
is possible that the use of protected health information for ``health
promotion'' may be construed under the proposed rule as part of
marketing activities.
    Based on the review of the leading association standards, we
believe that the proposed rule embodies all the major principles
expressed in the standards. However, there are some major areas of
difference between the proposed rule and the professional standards
reviewed. These include the subject individual's right of access to
health information in the covered entity's possession, relationships
between contractors and covered entities, and the requirement that
covered entities make their privacy policies and practices available to
patients through a notice and the ability to respond to questions
related to the notice. Because the proposed regulation would require
that (with a few exceptions) patients have access to their health
information that a covered entity possesses, large numbers of providers
may have to modify their current practices in order to allow patient
access, and to establish a review process if they deny a patient
access. Also, none of the privacy protection standards reviewed require
that providers or plans prepare a formal statement of privacy practices
for patients (although the major physician association urges members to
inform patients about who would have access to their protected health
information and how their health information would be used). Only one
HMO association explicitly made reference to information released for
legitimate research purposes, and none of the other statements we
reviewed discuss release of information for research purposes. The
proposed rule allows for the release of protected health information
for research purposes without an individual's authorization, but only
for research that is supervised by an institutional research board or
an equivalent privacy board. This research requirement may cause some
groups to revise their disclosure authorization standards.
2. State Laws
    The second body of privacy protections is found in a myriad of
State laws and requirements. To determine whether or not the proposed
rule would preempt a State law, we first identified the relevant laws,
and second, determined whether state or federal law provides
individuals with greater privacy protection.
    Identifying the relevant state statutes: Health privacy statutes
can be found in laws applicable to many issues including insurance,
worker's compensation, public health, birth and death records,
adoptions, education, and welfare. For example, Florida has over 60
laws that apply to protected health information. According to the
Georgetown Privacy Project \11\, Florida is not unique. Every State has
laws and regulations covering some aspect of medical information
privacy. In many cases, State laws were enacted to address a specific
situation, such as the reporting of HIV/AIDS, or medical conditions
that would impair a person's ability to drive a car. Identifying every
State statute, regulation, and court case that interprets statutes and
regulations dealing with patient medical privacy rights is an important
task but cannot be completed in this discussion. For the purpose of
this analysis, we simply acknowledge the complexity of State
requirements surrounding privacy issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \11\ Ibid, Goldman, p. 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Lastly, we recognize that the private sector will need to complete
a State-by-State analysis to comply with the notice and administrative
procedures portion of this proposed rule. This comparison should be
completed in the context of individual markets; therefore it is more
efficient for professional associations or individual businesses to
complete this task.
    Recognizing limits of our ability to effectively summarize State
privacy laws and our difficulty in determining preemption at the
outset, we discuss conclusions generated by the Georgetown University
Privacy Project in Janlori Goldman's report, The State of Health
Privacy: An Uneven Terrain. We consider Georgetown's report the best
and most comprehensive examination of State privacy laws currently
published. The report, which was completed in July 1999, is based on a
50-state survey. However, the author is quick to point out that this
study is not exhaustive.
    The following analysis of State privacy statutes and our attempt to
compare State laws to the proposed rule is limited as a result of the
large amount of State-specific data available. To facilitate
discussion, we have organized the analysis into two sections: access to
medical information and disclosure of medical information. Our analysis
is intended to suggest areas where the proposed rule appears to preempt
various State laws; it is not designed to be a definitive or wholly
comprehensive State-by-State comparison.
    Access to Subject's Information: In general, State statutes provide
individuals with access to their own medical records. However, only a
few States allow individuals access to virtually all entities that hold
health information. In 33 States, individuals may access their hospital
and health facility records. Only 13 States guarantee individuals
access to their HMO records, and 16 States provide individuals access
to their medical information when it is held by insurers. Seven states
have no statutory right of patient access; three States and the
District of Columbia have laws that only assure individuals' right to
access their mental health records. Only one State permits individuals
access to records held by providers, but it excludes pharmacists from
the definition of provider. Thirteen States grant individuals statutory
right of access to pharmacy records.

[[Page 60012]]

    The amount that entities are allowed to charge for copying of
individuals' records varies widely from State to State. A study
conducted by the American Health Information Management Association
\12\ found considerable variation in the amounts, structure, and
combination of fees for search and retrieval, and the copying of the
record.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \12\ ``Practice Briefs,'' Journal of AHIMA; Harry Rhodes, Joan
C. Larson, Association of Health Information Outsourcing Service;
January 1999.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In 35 States, there are laws or regulations that set a basis for
charging individuals inspecting and copying fees. Charges vary not only
by State, but also by whether the request is related to a worker's
compensation case or a patient-initiated request. Charges also vary
according to the setting. For example, States differentiate most often
between clinics and hospitals. Also, charges vary by the number of
pages and whether the request is for X-rays or for standard medical
information.
    Of the 35 States with laws regulating inspection and copying
charges, seven States either do not allow charges for retrieval of
records or require that the entity provide the first copy free of
charge. Some States may prohibit hospitals from charging patients a
retrieval and copying fee, but allow clinics to do so. It is noteworthy
that some States that do not permit charges for retrieval sometimes
allow entities to charge per-page rates ranging between $0.50 and
$0.75. In States that do allow a retrieval charge, the per-page charge
is usually $0.25. Eleven states specify only that the record holder may
charge ``reasonable/actual costs.''
    Of the States that allow entities to charge for record retrieval
and copying, charges range from a flat amount of $1.00 to $20.00. Other
States allow entities to charge varying rates depending on the amount
of material copied. For example, an entity may charge $5.00 for the
first five pages and then a fixed amount per page. In those cases, it
appears that retrieval and copying costs were actually combined. The
remaining States have a variety of cost structures: One State allows
$0.25 per page plus postage plus a $15.00 retrieval charge. Another
State allows a $1.00 charge per page for the first 25 pages and $0.25
for each page above 25 pages plus a $1.00 annual retrieval charge. A
third state allows a $1.00 per page charge for the first 100 pages and
$0.25 for each page thereafter.
    According to the report by the Georgetown Privacy Project, among
States that do grant access to patient records, the most common basis
for denying individuals access is concern for the life and safety of
the individual or others. This proposed rule considers the question of
whether to deny patient access on the basis of concern for the
individual's life or safety, concluding that the benefits of patient
access most often outweigh harm to the individual. This issue, which is
discussed in greater detail in other sections, has been resolved in
favor of promoting patient access.
    The amount of time an entity is given to supply the individual with
his or her record varies widely. Many States allow individuals to amend
or correct inaccurate health information, especially information held
by insurers. However, few States provide the right to insert a
statement in the record challenging the covered entity's information
when the individual and entity disagree.<SUP>13</SUP>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \13\ Ibid, Goldman, p.20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Disclosure of Health Information: State laws vary widely with
respect to disclosure of identifiable health information. Generally,
States have applied restrictions on the disclosure of health
information either to specific entities or to specific health
conditions. Just two states place broad limits on disclosure of
protected health information without regard for policies and procedures
developed by covered entities. Most States require patient
authorization before an entity may disclose health information, but as
the Georgetown report points out, ``In effect, the authorization may
function more as a waiver of consent--the patient may not have an
opportunity to object to any disclosures.'' <SUP>14</SUP>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \14\ Ibid, Goldman, p. 21.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    It is also important to point out that none of the States appear to
offer individuals the right to restrict disclosure of their protected
health information for treatment. Thus, the provision of the proposed
rule that allows patients to restrict disclosure of the their protected
information is not currently included in any State law. Because the
ability to restrict disclosure currently is not a standard practice,
the proposed rule would require entities to add these capabilities to
their information systems.
    State statutes often have exceptions to requiring authorization
before disclosure. The most common exceptions are for purposes of
treatment, payment, or auditing and quality assurance functions--which
are similar to the definition we have established for health care
operations, are therefore not subject to prior authorization
requirements under the proposed rule. Restrictions on re-disclosure of
protected health information also vary widely from State to State. Some
States restrict the re-disclosure of health information, and others do
not. The Georgetown report cites State laws that require providers to
adhere to professional codes of conduct and ethics with respect to
disclosure and re-disclosure of protected health information. What is
not clear is the degree to which individual information is improperly
released or used in the absence of specific legal sanctions.
    Most States have adopted specific measures to provide additional
protections with regard to certain conditions or illnesses that have
clear social or economic consequences. Although the Georgetown study
does not indicate the number of States that have adopted disease-
specific measures to protect information related to sensitive
conditions and illnesses, the analysis seems to suggest that nearly all
States have adopted some form of additional protection. The conditions
and illnesses most commonly afforded added privacy protection are:
    <bullet> Substance abuse;
    <bullet> Information derived from genetic testing;
    <bullet> Communicable and sexually-transmitted diseases;
    <bullet> Mental health; and
    <bullet> Abuse, neglect, domestic violence, and sexual assault.
    We have included a specific discussion of disclosures for research
purposes because if an entity decides to disclose information for
research purposes, it will incur costs that otherwise would be
associated with other disclosures under this rule. Some States place
restrictions on releasing condition-specific health information for
research purposes, while others allow release of information for
research without the patient's authorization. States frequently require
that researchers studying genetic diseases, HIV/AIDS, and other
sexually transmitted diseases have different authorization and privacy
controls than those used for other types of research. Some States
require approval from an IRB or agreements that the data will be
destroyed or identifiers removed at the earliest possible time. Another
approach has been for States to require researchers to obtain
sensitive, identifiable information from a State public health
department. One State does not allow automatic release of protected
health information for research purposes without notifying the subjects
that their health information may be used in research and allowing

[[Page 60013]]

them opportunity to object to the use of their
information.<SUP>15</SUP>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \15\ ``Medical records and privacy: empirical effects of
legislation; A memorial to Alice Hersh'; McCarthy, Douglas B;
Shatin, Deborah; et al. Health Service Research: April 1, 1999; No.
1, Vol. 34; p. 417. The article details the effects of the Minnesota
law conditioning disclosure of protected health information on
patient authorization.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Comparing State statutes to the proposed rule: A comparison of
State privacy laws with the proposed rule highlights several of the
proposed rule's key implications:
    <bullet> No State law requires covered entities to make their
privacy and access policies available to patients. Thus, all covered
entities that have direct contact with patients will be required to
prepare a statement of their privacy protection and access policies.
This necessarily assumes that entities have to develop procedures if
they do not already have them in place.
    <bullet> The proposed rule will affect more entities than are
affected under many State laws. In the application of the proposed rule
to providers, plans, and clearinghouses, the proposed rule will reach
nearly all entities involved in delivering and paying for health care.
Yet because HIPAA applies only to information that has been stored and
transmitted electronically, the extent to which the proposed rule will
reach information held by covered entities is unclear.
    <bullet> State laws have not addressed the form in which health
information is stored. We do not know whether covered entities will
choose to treat information that never has been maintained or
transmitted electronically in the same way that they treat post-
electronic information. We also do not know what portion of information
held in non-electronic formats has ever been electronically maintained
or transmitted. Nevertheless, the proposed rule would establish a more
level floor from which States could expand the privacy protections to
include both electronic information and non-electronic information.
    <bullet> Among the three categories of covered entities, it appears
that plans will be the most significantly affected by the access
provisions of the proposed rule. Based on the Health Insurance
Association of America (HIAA) data,<SUP>16</SUP> there are
approximately 94.7 million non-elderly persons who purchase health
insurance in the 35 States that do not provide patients a legal right
to inspect and copy their records. We do not have information on how
many of those people are in plans that grant patients inspection and
copying rights although State law does not require them to do so. We
discuss these points more fully in the cost analysis section.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \16\ Source Book of Health Insurance Data: 1997-1998, Health
Insurance Association of America, 1998. p. 33.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    <bullet> Although the proposed rule would establish a uniform
disclosure and re-disclosure requirement for all covered entities, the
groups most likely to be affected are health insurers, benefits
management administrators, and managed care organizations. These groups
have the greatest ability and economic incentives to use protected
health information for marketing services to both patients and
physicians without individual authorization. Under the proposed rule,
covered entities would have to obtain the individual's authorization
before they could use or disclose their information for purposes other
than treatment, payment, and health care operations--except in the
situations explicitly defined as allowable disclosures without
authorization.
    <bullet> While our proposed rule appears to encompass many of the
requirements found in current State laws, it also is clear that within
State laws, there are many provisions that cover specific cases and
health conditions. Certainly, in States that have no research
disclosure requirements, the proposed rule will establish a baseline
standard. But in States that do place conditions on the disclosure of
protected health information, the proposed rule may place additional
requirements on covered entities.
    <bullet> State privacy laws do not always apply to entities covered
by the proposed rule. For example, State laws may provide strong
privacy protection for hospitals and doctors but not for dentists or
HMOs. State laws protecting particular types of genetic testing or
conditions may be similarly problematic because they protect some types
of sensitive information and not others. In some instances, a patient's
right to inspect his or her medical record may be covered under State
laws and regulations when a physician has the medical information, but
not under State requirements when the information being sought is held
by a plan. Thus, the proposed rule would extend privacy requirements
already applicable to some entities within a State to other entities
that currently are not subject to State privacy requirements.
3. Federal Laws
    The Privacy Act of 1974. Federal agencies will be required to
comply with both the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a) and the HIPAA
regulation. The Privacy Act provides Federal agencies with a framework
and scheme for protecting privacy, and the HIPAA regulation will not
alter that scheme. Basic organizational and management features, such
as the provision of safeguards to protect the privacy of health
information and training for employees--which are required by this
proposed rule--already are required by the Privacy Act.
    The proposed rule has been designed so that individuals will not
have fewer rights than they have now under the Privacy Act. It may
require that agencies obtain individual authorization for some
disclosures that they now make without authorization under routine
uses.
    Private-sector organizations with contracts to conduct personal
data handling activities for the Federal government are subject to the
Privacy Act by virtue of performing a function on behalf of a Federal
agency. They too will be required to comply with both rules in the same
manner as Federal agencies.
    Substance Abuse Confidentiality Statute. Organizations that operate
specialized substance abuse treatment facilities and that either
receive Federal assistance or are regulated by a Federal agency are
subject to confidentiality rules established by section 543 of the
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290dd-2) and implementing
regulations at 42 CFR part 2.
    These organizations will be subject both to that statute and to the
HIPAA regulation. The proposed rule should have little practical effect
on the disclosure policies of these organizations, because the patient
confidentiality statute governing information about substance abuse is
generally more restrictive than this proposed rule. These organizations
will continue to be subject to current restrictions on their
disclosures. The substance abuse confidentiality statute does not
address patient access to records; the proposed privacy rule makes
clear that patient access is allowed.
    Federal agencies are subject to these requirements, and currently
they administer their records under both these requirements and the
Privacy Act. The Department of Veterans Affairs is subject to its own
substance abuse confidentiality statute, which is identical in
substance to the one of more general applicability. It also covers
information about HIV infection and sickle cell anemia (38 U.S.C.
7332).
    Rules Regarding Protection of Human Subjects. Health care delivered
by covered entities conducting clinical trials typically are subject to
both the

[[Page 60014]]

proposed rule and to Federal regulations for protection of human re
search subjects (The Federal Policy for the Protection of Human
Subjects, codified for the Department of Health and Human Services in
Title 45 CFR part 46, and/or the Food and Drug Administration's human
subject regulations for research in support of medical product
applications to the Food and Drug Administration, or regulated by that
agency, at 21 CFR parts 50 and 56).
    Current human subjects rules impose no substantive restrictions on
disclosure of patient information. Institutional review boards must
consider the adequacy of confiden tiality protections for subjects, and
researchers must tell subjects to what extent their con fidentiality
will be protected. There should be no conflict between these
requirements and the proposed rules. The proposed HIPAA regulation will
expand on the current human subjects requirements by requiring a more
detailed description of intended use of patient information. The
proposed HIPAA rule also requires additional criteria for waiver of
patient authorization.
    Medicaid. States may use information they obtain in the process of
administering Medicaid only for the purposes of administering the
program, pursuant to a State plan condition in section 1902(a)(7) of
the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(7). The proposed HIPAA rule
applies to State Medicaid programs, which under the rule are considered
health plans. There will be no conflict in the substantive requirements
of current rules and this proposed rule. Medicaid rules regarding
disclosure of patient information are stricter than provisions of the
proposed rule; therefore, Medicaid agencies simply will continue to
follow the Medicaid rules.
    ERISA. ERISA (29 U.S.C. 1002) was enacted in 1974 to regulate
pension and welfare employee benefit plans that are established by
private-sector employers, unions, or both, to provide benefits to their
workers and dependents. An employee welfare benefit plan provides
benefits--through insurance or otherwise--such as medical, surgical
benefits, as well as benefits to cover accidents, disability, death, or
unemployment. In 1996, HIPAA amended ERISA to require portability,
nondiscrimination, and renewability of health benefits provided by
group health plans and group health insurance issuers. Many, although
not all, ERISA plans are covered under the proposed rule as health
plans. We believe that the proposed rule does not conflict with ERISA.
Further discussion of ERISA can be found in the preamble for this
proposed rule.

E. Costs

    Affected entities will be implementing the privacy proposed rules
at the same time many of the administrative simplification standards
are being implemented. As described in the overall impact analysis for
the administrative simplification standards in the Federal Register,
Vol. 63, No. 88, May 7, 1998, page 25344, the data handling changes
occurring due to the other HIPAA standards will have both costs and
benefits. To the extent the changes required for the privacy standards
implementations can be made concurrently with the changes required for
the other standards, costs for the combined implementation should be
only marginally higher than for the administrative simplification
standards alone. The extent of this additional cost is uncertain, in
the same way that the costs associated with each of the individual
administrative simplification standards was uncertain.
    The costs associated with implementing the privacy standards will
be directly related to the number of affected entities and the number
of affected transactions in each entity.<SUP>17</SUP> We chose to use
the SBA data in the RFA because we wanted our analysis to be as
consistent to SBA definitions as possible to give the greatest accuracy
for the RFA purposes. As described in the overall administrative
simplification impact estimates (Tables 1 and 2, page 25344), about
20,000 health plans (excluding non-self administered employer
plans)<SUP>18</SUP> and hundreds of thousands of providers face
implementation costs. In the administrative simplification analysis,
the costs of provider system upgrades were expected to be $3.6 billion
over the period 1998-2002, and plan system cost upgrades were expected
to be $2.2 billion. (In the aggregate, this $5.8 billion cost is
expected to be more than completely offset by $7.3 billion in savings
during the 5 year period analyzed).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \17\ We have used two different data sources for our estimates
of the number of entities. In the regulatory impact analysis (RIA),
we chose to use the same number of entities cited in the other
Administrative Simplification rules. In the regulatory flexibility
analysis (RFA), we used the most recent data available from the
Small Business Administration (SBA).
    We chose to use the Administrative Simplification estimates in
the RIA because we wanted our analysis to be as consistent as
possible with those regulations. We also believe that because the
Administrative Simplification numbers are higher than those in the
SBA data, it was the more conservative data source.
    \18\ We have not included the 3.9 million ``other'' employer
health plans listed in HCFA's administrative simplification
regulations because these plans that are administered by a third
party. The proposed regulation will not regulate the employer-plans
but will regulate the third party administrators of the plans.
Because plan administrators have already been included in our
analysis, these other employer-sponsored plans will not incur
additional costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The relationship between the HIPAA security and privacy standards
is particularly relevant. On August 12, 1998, the Secretary published a
proposed rule to implement the HIPAA standards on security and
electronic standards. That rule specified the security requirements for
covered entities that transmit and store information specified in Part
C, Title XI of the Act. In general, that rule would establish the
administrative and technical standards for protecting ``* * * any
health information pertaining to an individual that is electronically
maintained or transmitted.'' (63 FR 43243). The security rule is
intended to spell out the system and administrative requirements that a
covered entity must meet in order to assure itself and the Secretary
that the protected health information is safe from destruction and
tampering from people without authorization for its access.
    By contrast, the privacy rule describes the policies and procedures
that would govern the circumstances under which protected health
information may be used and released with and without patient
authorization and when a patient may have access to his or her
protected medical information. This rule assumes that a covered entity
will have in place the appropriate security apparatus to successfully
carry out and enforce the provisions contained in the security rule.
    Although the vast majority of health care entities are privately
owned and operated, Federal, State, and local government providers are
reflected in the total costs.<SUP>19</SUP> Federal, state, and locally
funded hospitals represent approximately 26 percent of hospitals in the
United States. This is a significant portion of hospitals, but
represents a relatively small proportion of all

[[Page 60015]]

provider entities. The number of government providers who are employed
at locations other than government hospitals is significantly smaller
(approximately 2 percent of all providers). Weighting the relative
number of government hospital and non-hospital providers by the revenue
these types of providers generate, we estimate that health care
services provided directly by government entities represent 3.4 percent
of total health care services. IHS and Tribal facilities costs are
included in the total, since the adjustments made to the original
private provider data to reflect federal providers included them. In
drafting the proposed rule the Department consulted with States,
representatives of the National Congress of American Indians,
representatives of the National Indian Health Board, and a
representative of the self-governance tribes. During the consultation
we discussed issues regarding the application of Title II of HIPAA to
the States and Tribes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \19\ These costs only represent those of public entities serving
in the role of provider plan. The federal costs only reflect those
incurred by a provider and plan offering Medicaid or Medicare, and
hospitals run by the federal government including those run by the
Veteran's Administration and the militry. Federal enforcement and
other costs are not included. These estimates do not reflect any
larger systems changes necessary to running federal programs.
Likewise State costs are incorporated to the extent that States
serve as providers or plans (including Medicaid).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Estimating the costs associated with the privacy proposed rule
involves, for each provision, consideration of both the degree to which
covered entities must modify their records management systems and
privacy policies under the proposed rule, and the extent to which there
is a change in behavior of both patients and the covered entities as a
result of the proposed rule. In the following sections we will examine
these provisions as they would apply to the various covered entities as
they undertake to comply with the proposed rule. The major costs that
covered entities will incur are one time costs associated with
implementation of the proposed rules, and ongoing costs that result
from changes in behavior that both the covered entities and patients
would make in response to the new proposed rules.
    We have quantified the costs imposed by the proposed regulation to
the extent that we had adequate data. In some areas, however, there was
too little data to support quantitative estimates. As a result, the RIA
does not include cost estimates for all of the requirements of the
regulation. The areas for which explicit cost estimates have not be
made are: The principle of minimum necessary disclosure; the
requirement that entities monitor business partners with whom they
share PHI; creation of de-identified information; internal complaint
processes; sanctions; compliance and enforcement; the designation of a
privacy official and creation of a privacy board; and additional
requirements on research/optional disclosures that will be imposed by
the regulation. The cost of some of these provisions may be
significant, but it would be inaccurate to project costs for these
requirements given the fact that several of these concepts are new to
the industry.
    The one time costs are primarily in the area of development and
codification of procedures. Specific activities include: (1) Analysis
of the significance of the federal regulations on covered entity
operation; (2) development and documentation of policies and procedures
(including new ones or modification of existing ones); (3)
dissemination of such policies and procedures both inside and outside
the organization; (4) changing existing records management systems or
developing new systems; and (5) training personnel on the new policies
and system changes.
    Covered entities will also incur ongoing costs. These are likely to
be the result of: (1) Increased numbers of patient requests for access
and copying of their own records; (2) the need for covered entities to
obtain patient authorization for uses of protected information that had
not previously required an authorization; (3) increased patient
interest in limiting payer and provider access to their records; (4)
dissemination and implementation both internally and externally of
changes in privacy policies, procedures, and system changes; and (5)
training on the changes.
    Compliance with the proposed rule will cost $3.8 billion over five
years. These costs are in addition to the administrative simplification
estimates. The cost of complying with the regulation represents 0.09
percent of projected national health expenditures the first year the
regulation is enacted. The five year costs of the proposed regulation
also represents 1.0 percent of the increase in health care costs
experienced over the same five-year period.<SUP>20</SUP> Because of the
uncertainty of the data currently available, the Department has made
estimates on ``low'' and ``high'' range assumptions of the key
variables. These estimates show a range of $1.8 to $6.3 billion over
five years. It is important to note that these estimates do not include
the areas for which we have made no cost estimates (discussed above).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \20\ Health Care Finance Administration, Office of the Actuary,
1997.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Initial Costs
Privacy Policies and Procedures
    With respect to the initial costs for covered entities, the
expectation that most of the required HIPAA procedures will be
implemented as a package suggests that additional costs for the privacy
standards should be small. Since the requirements for developing formal
processes and documentation of procedures mirror what will already have
been required under the security regulations, the additional costs
should be small. The expectation is that national and state
associations will develop guidelines or general sets of processes and
procedures and that these will generally be adopted by individual
member entities. Relatively few providers or entities are expected to
develop their own procedures independently or to modify significantly
those developed by their associations. Our estimates are based on
assumed costs for providers ranging from $300 to $3000, with the
weighted average being about $375. The range correlates to the size and
complexity of the provider, and is a reasonable estimate of the cost of
coordinating the policies and procedures outlined in the proposed
regulation. With fewer than 1 million provider entities, the aggregate
cost would be on the order of $300 million.
    For plans, our estimate assumes that the legal review and
development of written policies will be more costly because of the
scope of their operations. They are often dealing with a large number
of different providers and may be dealing with requirements from
multiple states. Again, we expect associations to do much of the basic
legal analysis but plans are more likely to make individual
adaptations. We believe this cost will range from $300 for smaller
plans and $15,000 for the largest plans. Because there are very few
large plans in relation to the number of small plans, the weighted
average implementation costs will be about $3050.
    The total cost of development of policies and procedures for
providers and plans is estimated to be $395 million over five years.
System Compliance Costs
    With respect to revisions to electronic data systems, the specific
refinements needed to fulfill the privacy obligations ought to be
closely tied to the refinements needed for security obligations. The
overall administrative simplification system upgrades (procedures,
systems, and training) of $5.8 billion would certainly be
disproportionately associated with the security standard, relative to
the other 11 elements. If in privacy it constitutes 15 percent, then
the security standard would represent about $900 million system cost.
If the marginal cost of the privacy elements is another 10 percent,

[[Page 60016]]

then the addition cost would be $90 million.
Ongoing Costs
    The recurrent costs may be more closely related to total numbers of
persons with claims than to the number of covered entities. The number
of individuals served by an entity will vary greatly. The number of
persons with claims will give a closer approximation of how many people
entities will have to interact with for various provisions.
Notice of Privacy Practices
    No State laws or professional associations currently require
entities to provide patients ``notice'' of their privacy policies.
Thus, we expect that all entities will incur costs developing and
disseminating privacy policy notices. Each entity will have a notice
cost associated with each person to whom they provide services. Data
from the 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey shows that there are
approximately 200 million ambulatory care encounters per year, nearly
20 million persons with a hospital episode, 7 million with home-health
episodes, and over 170 million with prescription drug use (350 million
total). For the remaining four years of the five year period, we have
estimated that, on average, a quarter of the remaining population will
enter the system, and thus receive a notice. If we account for growth
in the number of people who may enter the health care system over the
five year period of our analysis, we estimate that approximately 543
million patients will be seen at least once by one or more types of
providers.
    The development cost for notices is estimated to cost $30 million
over five years, though most of this is likely to occur the first year.
The first year cost of providing notices to patients, customers and
plan enrollees would be $106 million. The total five year cost of
providing new and subsequent copies to all provider patients and
customers would be approximately $209 million.
    The notice obligations of insurers apply on initial enrollment,
with updated notices at least every 3 years. However, given enrollment
changes and the sophistication of automation, we believe many plans
would find it cheaper and more efficient to provide annual notices.
    The 1998 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) from the Census
Bureau shows about 174.1 million persons are covered by private health
insurance, on an unduplicated basis. NHIS calculates that persons who
are privately insured hold approximately 1.3 policies per person. Based
on information provided by several plans, we believe most plans would
provide an independent mailing the first year, but in subsequent years
would provide notices as an inclusion in other mailings. The cost for
this would be $0.75 over five years. If we account for these duplicate
policies and assume that the cost of sending the notices to a
policyholder is $0.75, the total cost to plans would be $231 million
over five years. This includes both public and private plans.
    We request comments regarding our cost estimates for development
and distribution of notices.
    The costs for more careful internal operation of covered entities
to execute their formal privacy procedures are highly dependent on the
extent to which current practice tracks the future procedures. Entities
that already have strict data sharing and confidentiality procedures
will incur minimal costs, since their activities need not change much.
Entities that have not developed explicit health information privacy
policies may be compelled to obtain patient authorization in situations
where they did not previously. These changes will generate ongoing
costs as well as initial costs. We solicit comment with respect to the
way current costs differ from those projected by the requirements of
the proposed privacy rule. An example of such an area is ``the minimum
necessary disclosure principle''--because of differing current
practices, we do not have data that reliably indicate how much this
provision will cost.
Inspection and Copying
    The Georgetown report on State privacy laws indicates that 33
states currently give patients some right to access medical
information. The most common right of access granted by State law is
the right to inspect personal information held by physicians and
hospitals. In the process of developing estimates for the cost of
providing access and copying, we assumed that most providers currently
have procedures for allowing patients to inspect and copying their own
record. Thus, we expect that the economic impact of requiring entities
to allow individuals to access and copy their records should be
relatively small. Copying costs, including labor, should be a fraction
of a dollar per page. We expect the cost to be passed on to the
consumer.
    There are few studies that address the cost of providing medical
records to patients. The most recent was a study in 1998 by the
Tennessee Comtroller of the Treasury. It found an average cost of $9.96
per request, with an average of 31 pages per request. The total cost
per page of providing copies was $0.32 per page. This study was
performed on hospitals only. The cost per request may be lower for
other types of providers, since those seeking hospital records are more
likely to be sick and have more complicated records than those in a
primary care or other type of office. An earlier report showed much
higher costs than the Tennessee study. In 1992, Rose Dunn published a
report based on her experience as a manager of medical records. She
estimated a 10 page request would cost $5.32 in labor costs only,
equaling labor cost per page of $0.53. However, this estimate appears
to reflect costs before computerization. The expected time spent per
search was 30.6 minutes; 85 percent of this time could be significantly
reduced with computerization (this includes time taken for file
retrieval, photocopying, and re-filing; file retrieval is the only time
cost that would remain under computerization.) For subsequent
estimates, we will use the Tennessee experience.
    The proposed regulation states that entities may charge patients a
reasonable fee to inspect and copy their health information. For this
reason, we expect the cost of inspecting and copying an individual
medical record to be passed on to consumers who request the service.
Nonetheless, it is important to provide an estimate of the potential
costs associated with inspection and copying. We assume that 1.5
percent of patients will request access to inspect and copy their
medical record, and that the cost of accessing and copying a record is
approximately $10 (as cited in the Tennessee study). The cost of
inspection and copying is $81 million a year, or $405 million over five
years. This cost is likely to be borne entirely by the consumer.
Amendment and Correction
    We have assumed that many providers make provisions to help
patients expedite amendment and correction of their medical record
where appropriate. However, as with inspection and copying, the right
to request amendment and correction of an individual's medical record
is not guaranteed by all States. Based on these assumptions and our
cost analysis, we conclude that the principal economic effect of the
proposed rule would be to expand the right to request amendment and
correction to plans and providers that are not covered by state laws or
codes of conduct. In addition, we expect that the proposed rule may
draw additional attention to the issue of record inaccuracies and
stimulate

[[Continued on page 60017]]
