Paula Cleggett
Headquarters, Washington, DC           February 23, 2001
(Phone: 202/358-1400)

NASA ADMINISTRATOR APPOINTS JOHNSON SPACE CENTER
DIRECTOR TO SENIOR ASSISTANT POSITION

     NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin today appointed 
George Abbey, Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), as 
his Senior Assistant for International Issues.  This 
appointment comes after a highly decorated career stemming 
from the Apollo program, which earned Abbey the Medal of 
Freedom for his role on the Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team.  

Roy Estess, Director of NASA's Stennis Space Center in 
Mississippi, will serve as the acting director of JSC.  
Stennis is the Agency's lead center for rocket propulsion 
testing and for commercial remote sensing.

"George has done a commendable job of leading a safe and 
dependable Space Shuttle program," said Goldin.  "The 
International Space Station is now a reality, thanks to 
George's extensive commitment and capability.  Destiny, the 
U.S. laboratory module, was successfully delivered to the ISS 
just a week ago.  The United States has a permanent presence 
in space.  I am profoundly grateful to George for his 
professional and personal dedication to the Agency.

"As the President has indicated, there needs to be reform in 
human spaceflight.  During this time of transition, it is also 
the time for a change of leadership at the Johnson Space 
Center.  We face a difficult and challenging future within the 
space program, and Roy Estess, working closely with Joe 
Rothenberg, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, will 
ensure a firm footing during this period.

"The people at the Johnson Space Center are outstanding, and 
they will continue to make the space program strong.  Roy 
Estess is a great Center Director, and I encourage the JSC 
staff to give Roy their full support," said Goldin.

Rothenberg will have the responsibility, along with Estess, to 
look at the talent at NASA and make recommendations as to who 
should be the new leader of JSC. Estess' 40-year career in 
critical engineering and management positions distinguished 
him as a recognized leader, twice receiving the Presidential 
Distinguished Service Award. 

Rothenberg, head of NASA's Human Exploration and Development 
of Space Enterprise, has institutional responsibilities for 
the Johnson Space Center in Houston, the Kennedy Space Center 
in Florida, the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama and 
the Stennis Space Center. Rothenberg previously served as the 
Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. 

Spanning a 50-year career, Abbey's legacy reveals a 
professional dedication that created hallmarks in the history 
of space flight.  Resigning his Air Force commission in 1967, 
he distinguished himself at the Johnson Space Center through 
increasingly responsible positions where he served as the 
Director of Flight Operations, responsible for the early 
operational flights of the Space Shuttle, and the Director of 
Flight Crew Operations, responsible for management of flight 
crews as well as center aircraft. 

Abbey held senior level positions at NASA Headquarters before 
he was named acting JSC Director in 1995, becoming Center 
Director in 1996. In 1991, he was appointed to the Executive 
Office of the President as Senior Director, Civil Space 
Policy, National Space Council.

                         - end -
