
   LORD ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC., ET AL., PETITIONERS V. UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA

   No. 86-663

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1986

   On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of
Appeals for the Sixth Circuit

   Brief for the United States in Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Question presented
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-15a) is reported
at 797 F.2d 1377.  The opinion of the district court and the
recommendation of the magistrate are unreported.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 31, 1986.
A petition for rehearing was denied on September 19, 1986 (Pet. App.
16a).  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C.
1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the court of appeals correctly concluded that the
bid-rigging conspiracy charged in the indictment is not the same
offense as other conspiracies for which petitioners had previously
been prosecuted.

                               STATEMENT

   This case involves the so-called "Spurlock conspiracy," an alleged
conspiracy to rig bids in 1978 on an electrical construction project
for the coal-powered Spurlock II Generating Station in Maysville,
Kentucky.  Petitioner Lord Electric Company (Lord) is a contractor
that bids on large electrical projects, and petitioner Peter F.
Matthews is its president.  On June 14, 1984, a federal grand jury in
the Eastern District of Kentucky indicted petitioners and others for
the Spurlock conspiracy.  Count one of the indictment charged a
violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. 1;  counts two
and three charged violations of the mail fraud statute, 18 U.S.C.
1341.  Pet. App. 1a-2a.  /1/

   Petitioners had previously been acquitted of criminal participation
in the so-called "WPPSS conspiracy." The WPPSS consipracy involved bid
rigging on electrical work for nuclear power projects run by the
Washington Public Power Supply System and the Public Service Company
of Indiana.  Pet. App. 4a-5a.

   Petitioners moved to dismiss the indictment on the basis of double
jeopardy.  Petitioners' primary claim was that the Spurlock conspiracy
charged in this case was actually part of the WPPSS conspiracy.
Alternatively, petitioners argued that both the Spurlock and WPPSS
conspiracies were part of an even larger conspiracy involving the
nation's largest electrical contractors.  Petitioners did not define
the scope of their alleged "superconspiracy" and presented no evidence
establishing the existence of the superconspiracy.  /2/ Petitioners
also did not explain why, if such a superconspiracy existed, they had
not urged it as a bar to any of their prior prosecutions.  /3/
Petitioners sought to compel further discovery of grand jury
trnascripts that they hoped might help to establish their claim.  Pet.
App. 9a-13a.  /4/

   1. On October 24, 1984, the district court referred the double
jeopardy and discovery motions to a magistrate (C.A. App. 357).  The
parties submitted extensive briefs and evidence, including previous
indictments, grand jury excerpts, and former trial trnascripts bearing
on these issues.  In a thorough opinion (id. at 418-468), the
magistrate concluded that the defendants had made a nonfrivolous
showing that the Spurlock and WPPSS conspiracies were part of a single
conspiracy, but that the government had refuted that showing by a
preponderance of the evidence (id. at 439-454).  /5/ The magistrate
rejected as frivolous the defendants' superconspiracy theory (id. at
454-459).  Assuming that the claim was not frivolous, however, the
magistrate concluded that the government had rebutted the showing by a
preponderance of the evidence (id. at 459-462).  The magistrate also
stated that, in his examination of "in excess of 200 grand jury
transcripts, no substantive suggestion of evidentiary support for the
superconspiracy argument arose" (id. at 463 (footnote omitted)).

   The district court generally adopted the magistrate's findings and
conclusions as to the double jeopardy and discovery claims.  It held,
however, that defendants had made a nonfrivolous showing on their
superconspiracy claim as well as their narrow single conspiracy claim.
 C.A. App. 479-480.

   2. The court of appeals affirmed.  It began by noting that, under
Braverman v. United States, 317 U.S. 49 (1942), "if the conspiracy
charged in this case and the conspiracy of which the defendants were
indicted and acquitted in another case were both part of a single
agreement, this indictment is barred and must be dismissed" (Pet. App.
3a-4a).  The court also held that "the multiple/single conspiracy
issue is determined by applying a 'totality of the circumstances' test
rather than the more limited 'same evidence' test" (id. at 4a).

   With respect to petitioners' primary argument that the Spurlock and
WPPSS conspiracies were part of a single agreement to rig bids, the
court held that the district court's finding that the WPPSS and
Spurlock indictments charged separate conspiracies was not clearly
erroneous (Pet. App. 6a-9a).  Petitioners have not sought review of
that holding.

   The court also rejected petitioners' alternative claim of a
superconspiracy, reasoning as follows (Pet. App. 12a):

         Assuming, without deciding, that the superconspiracy that
      defendants describe exists, the evidence in the record shows
      beyond doubt that it was no more than a passive understanding
      that bid-rigging was an accepted way to do business.  /6/ It was
      well known in the industry that the practice occurred, and the
      means and jargon employed in each agreement were often
      identical, but agreements to rig individual project(s) were made
      only when opportunities arose and * * * the arrangements had to
      be negotiated "from scratch" each time.

   Thus, the court of appeals concluded that, "in view of the nature
of the nationwide conspiracy described by the defendants, the
conspiracy charged in the indictment before us is, as a matter of law,
not the 'same offense' as the other offspring conspiracies for which
the defendants have been tried or indicted" (Pet. App. 13a).

                               ARGUMENT

   The decision of the court of appeals is correct and does not
conflict with any decision of this Court or any other court of
appeals.  Further review is therefore not warranted.

   1. Petitioners, critical of dicta in the opinion of the court of
appeals, fail to distinguish those dicta from what the court actually
held, and indeed devote virtually none of their petition to defending
their own "superconspiracy" theory.  The holding of the court of
appeals is that the record in this case supports, at most, a finding
that petitioners and the other leading electrical contractors had "a
passive understanding that bid-rigging was an acceptable way to do
business" but that "agreements to rig individual project(s) were made
only when opportunities arose and * * * the arrangements had to be
negotiated 'from scratch' each time" (Pet. App. 12a).  A passive
understanding of the kind described is by no stretch of the
imagination a conspiracy.  For example, a bank robber might have a
passive understanding that several of his friends would be willing and
able, if asked, to drive the getaway car, and that other friends would
be willing and able, if asked, to crack the safe, the next time he
robs a bank.  That understanding does not amount to a conspiracy
between the bank robber and his friends.  If the bank robber calls on
two of those friends (one expert driver and one expert safecracker) to
help him rob Bank A, and later calls on the same or different friends
to help him rob Bank B, the government certainly may prosecute both
conspiracies separately, as long as both arrangements were negotiated
"from scratch." The holding of the court of appeals is unassailable.

   Rather than attack that holding, petitioners have seized on a
comment in the opinion of the court of appeals that could not be
correctly applied to the facts of this case and was not the basis of
the decision.  The court of appeals suggested that there is a class of
cases in which the government "may choose to prosecute the parent
conspiracy, or it may charge the individual offspring separately"
(Pet. App. 12a).  Whatever the merits of that observation generally,
it is certainly incorrect if it was meant to imply that the government
could have prosecuted something that was "no more than a passive
understanding" (ibid.) as a conspiracy.  "(T)he essence of" any
conspiracy "is an agreement to commit an unlawful act" (Inannelli v.
United States, 420 U.S. 770, 777 (1975)), and petitioners' "passive
understanding" of what was "acceptable practice in the industry" (Pet.
App. 10a) was not such an agreement.

   If the government had indicted petitioners for a superconspiracy,
and the court of appeals had held that the record in this case
supported such an indictment, the court of appeals would have
committed error.  That is not what happened, however.  The court of
appeals merely included a dictum that may have been erroneous in an
opinion reaching an entirely correct result.  That dictum is not a
basis for this Court to grant certiorari.

   2.a. Petitioners contend that the court below held "that it is
permissible for the government to divide a single conspiracy into
separate conspiracies and prosecute a defendant in successive
indictments for those separate conspiracies" (Pet. 8).  From this
premise, they argue that the decision below conflicts with this
Court's decision in Braverman v. United States, 317 U.S. 49 (1942),
and with the decisions of courts of appeals following Braverman (Pet.
8-11).  Petitioners' premise is incorrect, however, and no conflict
exists.

   The court of appeals, far from rejecting Braverman, expressly
relied on Braverman and its own opinions following Braverman (Pet.
App. 3a-4a).  The court recognized that, if an indictment is based on
an agreement that is "part" of a larger agreement on which a former
prosecution was based, it "must be dismissed" (id. at 4a), and the
court did not say, as petitioners repeatedly claim (Pet. 6, 11, 14),
that the Spurlock and WPPSS conspiracies were "part" or "parts" of a
larger agreement.  The court of appeals merely rejected the
proposition that a former conspiracy prosecution bars a later one
whenever both conspiracies "are, in some sense, products" of a larger
understanding (Pet. App. 11a).  As the court made clear, the Spurlock
and WPPSS conspiracies were "products" of the national
"superconspiracy" only in the sense that petitioners might have known
"that the (other) participants w(ould) be receptive to requests that
some future project be rigged" (id. at 12a).

   Bids were rigged on a particular project only after an agreement
relating to that project was negotiated "from scratch" (Pet. App.
12a).  Knowledge that bid rigging was an accepted way of doing
business for many companies in the industry simply made negotiations
leading to specific agreements to rig bids easier;  it did not
guarantee that any particular bid would be rigged.  Thus, each
specific bid-rigging agreement was "independent" of the so-called
superconspiracy and a "distinct violation()" (ibid.).  On that basis,
the court held that the Spurlock conspiracy was "not the 'same
offense'" as the WPPSS conspiracy (id. at 13a).  Therefore, the
government could prosecute each individual agreement to rig bids
separately (ibid.).  That essentially factual determination does not
conflict with Braverman and is entirely consistent with the decisions
of other courts of appeals.  /7/ It does not warrant review by this
Court.

   b. Petitioners claim specifically (Pet. 2, 6, 10) that the decision
below conflicts with the decision in United States v. Beachner
Construction Co., 729 F.2d 1278 (10th Cir. 1984).  The court below did
criticize the rationale of Beachner, but that criticism falls far
short of a conflict warranting review by this Court.

   In Beachner, the Tenth Circuit was, apparently, willing to uphold
(as not clearly erroneous) the district court's inference of an
overarching conspiratorial agreement because "asphalt contractors in
Kansas understood for over twenty-five years that the ability to rig
bids was available using (a specified) method" (729 F.2d at 1283).
The court in this case explicitly labeled that approach "invalid," and
indicated that the Tenth Circuit should have examined "the factual
nature of the parent and offspring agreements" and "the relationship
between them" in order "to determine whether the offspring are
independent of or dependent on the parent" (Pet. App. 11a).  That
single disagreement with Beachner's reasoning, however, does not mean
that the court below would have found separate conspiracies in
Beachner or that the Beachner court would have found a single
"superconspiracy" here.  /8/

   There were many additional factors present in Beachner, and absent
here, that supported a determination that there was a single
conspiracy in that case.  There was undisputed evidence establishing
that there had been a single conspiracy to rig bids in Kansas before
1972 (729 F.2d at 1280).  Although the government contended that the
single conspiracy had ended in 1972, when the company that directed
the bid rigging went out of business and the State changed its
procurement methods (ibid.), the courts found instead as a matter of
fact that the conspiracy was "self-perpetuating in nature" (id. at
1282).  The Tenth Circuit also found that the various bid-rigging
agreements were mutually dependent and inter-related, noting that the
conspirators created reciprocal obligations that kept the conspiracy
continuing from project to project (id. at 1280 & n.5, 1282).  That
factor is notably absent from the present case, in which the court
specifically rejected the "theory that Spurlock was the quid pro quo
for WPPSS 1 & 4" (Pet. App. 6a) and was not urged to find any other
independence.

   All of the separate bids in Beachner were made to a single
customer, the Kansas Department of Transportation.  By contrast,
petitioners' theory is that every bid rigged for any customer anywhere
in the country was part of a single conspiracy.  Beachner also
involved a persistent "'common method' of 'setting up' a job," which
apparently any contractor in Kansas could "'plug() into' at any time"
(729 F.2d at 1282).  The courts below found no similar evidence in
this case.  /9/ Indeed, the court of appeals that considered the
Philadelphia conspiracy (which would be part of petitioners'
"superconspiracy" if their theory were accepted) found enormous
differences between the way petitioners and their co-conspirators did
business in different locations (Sargent Electric Co., 785 F.2d at
1131;  id. at 1132-1133 (Stapleton, J., concurring)).

   In these circumstances, there is no real conflict between the
decision below and Beachner.  The two courts of appeals applied their
methods of analysis to two very different factual situations and, not
surprisingly in light of the factual differences, reached different
conclusions.  That is not the kind of conflict in the circuits that
requires resolution by this Court.

   c. Petitioners attack use of the "same evidence" test in
distinguishing single from multiple conspiracies, and complain that
the approach adopted by the court of appeals in this case is equally
unworkable (Pet. 11-14).  Petitioners' attacks on the "same evidence"
test are of no particular moment, however, because the court of
appeals agreed with them that a "totality of the circumstances" test
was preferable (Pet. App. 4a).  Petitioners' attacks on the approach
that the court of appeals did use are either wrong, or premature, or
both.  If petitioners are suggesting that a court should not attempt
to distinguish a mere "passive understanding" about acceptable
industry practice from an actual conspiratorial agreement, they are
simply wrong.  Such a "passive understanding" is not an agreement, and
without an agreement there is no conspiracy (see pages 7-8, supra).
If petitioners' complaint is that the court of appeals suggested that
a "passive understanding" is a "prosecutable offense()" (Pet. 14),
then we agree with them that that suggestion, if intended, was
erroneous (see pages 7-8, supra).  It will be time enough to correct
that error, however, when and if any court ever holds that an
indictment based on such a "passive understanding" is sufficient.
Petitioners, who have not been prosecuted on the basis of a "passive
understanding," are not entitled to a writ of certiorari simply
because the court of appeals may have suggested that such an
understanding was itself prosecutable.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   CHARLES F. RULE

      Acting Assistant Attorney General

   JOHN J. POWERS, III

   ANDREA LIMMER

      Attorneys

   DECEMBER 1986

   /1/ Wente Construction Company, which was also indicted, pleaded
guilty.  Donald W. McCabe, a vice president of Lord, was indicted and
is awaiting trial.

   /2/ Petitioners noted that the major electrical contractors had
been prosecuted for bid rigging and that there were some similarities
in how bids were rigged on particular projects.  Thus, although
petitioners presented no direct evidence establishing that there was a
single nationwide conspiracy to rig bids on electrical projects, they
argued that the existence of such an agreement could be inferred.

   /3/ Before the decision in this case, Lord had been indicted for
bid rigging on electrical construction projects three other times.
After its acquittal in the WPPSS conspiracy case, Lord was indicted,
tried, and convicted of bid rigging on electrical construction
projects in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia.  Lord stood trial in
Pittsburgh without claiming any double jeopardy defense.  In fact,
Lord argued in Pittsburgh that the conspiracy charged -- rigging bids
on electrical construction contracts at United States Steel's Western
Pennsylvania Works -- was too broad and that the indictment should
instead have charged at least 14 separate conspiracies, one for each
of the jobs shown at trial to have been rigged.  United States v.
Fischbach & Moore, Inc., 750 F.2d 1183 (3d Cir. 1984), cert. denied,
470 U.S. 1029 (1985).  In Philadelphia, Lord made a narrow double
jeopardy claim, aruging only that the conspiracy charged -- one to rig
bids at United States Steel's Fairless Works -- was part of the same
conspiracy for which it had been convicted in Pittsburgh.  The court
of appeals rejected that claim.  United States v. Sargent Electric
Co., 785 F.2d 1123 (3d Cir. 1986), cert. denied, No. 85-1936 (Oct. 6,
1986).

   /4/ Petitioners have not sought review in this Court of the denial
of their discovery motions by the magistrate and the district court,
which was affirmed by the court of appeals (Pet. App. 13a).

   /5/ In the WPPSS case, the government had alleged that the
defendants had conspired to allocate nuclear power plant projects
among three sets of contractors:  WPPSS 1 and 4 to a joint venture of
The Howard P. Foley Co. (Foley) and Wismer & Becker Contracting
Engineers, Inc.; WPPSS 3 and 5 to Fischbach and Moore, Inc.; and
Marble Hill to a joint venture of Lord and Commonwealth Electric
Company.  The projects ranged in price from $98 to $151 million.
Testimony at the WPPSS trial established that these projects were
discussed at two meetings in California:  one at La Quinta Resort in
Palm Springs in April 1978, and one at the Queensway Hilton in Long
Beach in May 1978.  There is no evidence from the WPPSS trial that any
projects other than nuclear power projects were discussed or
considered at these meetings.  Pet. App. 5a.

   In the alleged Spurlock conspiracy, four companies submitted bids
for the Spurlock project:  Lord, Foley, Sargent Electric Company, and
Watson-Flagg Electric Company, Inc.  Foley and Wente Construction Co.
had formed a joint venture to submit a bid for the Spurlock project.
Robert J. Van Divender, who had been in charge of Foley's branch
office in Richmond, Virginia, testified that he agreed with petitioner
Matthews to rig the $9 million Spurlock project in favor of petitioner
Lord because in 1976 Lord had agreed to support Van Divender in
rigging an $8 million Union Camp Corporation job in Franklin,
Virginia.  Wente officials also went along with the scheme because,
although they had never met Matthews and did not owe Lord any
"favors," Matthews agreed to pay Wente $50,000.  Pet App. 2a.

   /6/ The evidence showed "no more than an agreement to agree, a
willingness to enter into future illegal compacts" (Pet. App.
11a-12a).

   /7/ See, e.g., United States v. Sargent Electric Co., 785 F.2d
1123, 1132 (3d Cir. 1986) (Stapleton, J., concurring) ("to a firm
interested in bid rigging, knowledge as to the identity and
trustworthiness of others willing to do the same is of great value * *
*," but it is irrelevant to the determination whether bid rigging at
different locations was the result of a single conspiratorial
agreement or multiple agreements), cert. denied, No. 85-1936 (Oct. 6,
1986);  United States v. Korfant, 771 F.2d 660, 663 (2d Cir. 1985)
(fact that "single common actor" participated in and allegedly
directed "two sets of conspiratorial activities" that had the common
objective of fixing certain grocery prices "d(id) not establish the
existence of a single conspiracy" when the evidence established that
the conspiracies were functionally independent);  United States v.
Consolidated Packaging Corp., 575 F.2d 117, 128 (7th Cir. 1978)
(dictum) (conspiracies that are "spawned" by a larger agreement can be
separately prosecuted).

   /8/ Most obviously, the holding by the Beachner court that the
trial court's findings of fact were not clearly erroneous cannot be
taken to mean that contrary findings of fact, on a different record
(or even the same one), would have been held to be clearly erroneous.

   /9/ The magistrate found that there was "a (de minimis) overlap in
personnel between the" various conspiracies that petitioners suggest
might be part of the superconspiracy (C.A. App. 459-460).  "That,
coupled with an overly broad time period of twelve years, various
unconnected overt acts, and geographically distinct phone
conversations and meetings from which bid rigging was to have arisen,
all support a theory of separate conspiracies" (id. at 460 (footnotes
omitted)).
