
   JAMES B. RUTLAND, PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 90-1064

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1990

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Fifth Circuit

   Brief For The United States In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Questions Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 16a-37a) is reported
at 907 F.2d 489.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 23, 1990.
A petition for rehearing was denied on October 9, 1990.  Pet. App.
38a.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C.
1254(l).

                          QUESTIONS PRESENTED

   1. Whether the district court erred in instructing the jury on the
defense of withdrawal from a conspiracy.

   2. Whether petitioner was properly convicted of violating the
Sherman Act because of his involvement in a bid-rigging scheme.

                               STATEMENT

   On November 3, 1988, a grand jury in the Eastern District of
Louisiana indicted MMR Corporation, its Chairman, Robert P. McCracken,
and its President, petitioner.  The defendants were each charged with
one count of violating the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. 1, and three counts
of mail fraud, 18 U.S.C. 1341, for agreeing to rig the bids on the
electrical construction portion of a power station known as "Big
Cajun" Unit 3 near New Roads, Louisiana.  The jury convicted
petitioner and MMR on all counts and acquitted McCracken.  Petitioner
was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and fined a total of
$103,000.  The court of appeals affirmed.  Pet. App. 1a-12a, 16a-37a.

   1. In March 1980, representatives of several large electrical
contractors, including Fischbach and Moore, Inc., had a meeting at
which they discussed allocating future electrical projects.  Fischbach
expressed interest in the Big Cajun Unit 3 project and, over the next
several months, was successful in persuading the other large
contractors to agree to rig the bids on that project in its favor.
Fischbach, however, could not proceed with its plan to rig the bids
without the cooperation of petitioner's company, MMR.  MMR previously
had performed work for Cajun Electric and had persuaded Cajun
engineers to put MMR on the bid list along with other companies that
had demonstrated the financial and technical capability to perform the
electrical portion of the Unit 3 contract.  MMR had taken out plans
for the project and had sent representatives to a meeting with Big
Cajun engineers on December 16, 1980.  Pet. App. 17a-18a.

   On December 19, 1980, Paul Murphy, a regional vice-president of
Fischbach, and J.R. Sturgill, another Fischbach official, met with
petitioner and MMR's chairman Robert McCracken.  Murphy told
petitioner and McCracken that the other bidders on the Big Cajun
project had agreed to rig the job in favor of Fischbach if MMR would
also agree.  Petitioner expressed his strong belief that MMR could do
the work.  He suggested that MMR and Fischbach perform the job as a
joint venture, but Murphy would not agree to that proposal.  After
petitioner and Murphy went to the men's room, however, they reported
that they had struck a deal.  MMR agreed to help Fischbach win the
contract;  in exchange, MMR would receive a subcontract for a portion
of the work at a substantial markup.  Pet. App. 18a-19a.

   On January 14, 1981, two days before the bids were due, petitioner
and his chief estimator came to Fischbach's offices to give Fischbach
their cost estimates.  /1/ After discussing their cost estimates, they
agreed that the actual cost of the job would be approximately $17
million.  Fischbach decided to put in a bid of over $21 million and
directed MMR to make an even higher bid.  Because Fischbach was aware
of MMR's good relationship with Cajun Electric and was afraid that
Cajun Electric might select MMR if MMR's bid was too close to
Fischbach's, Murphy decided that MMR should be the highest bidder.
Petitioner, however, said that he would be embarrassed to submit a
price that was so much higher than his estimate.  To avoid that
embarrassment, MMR did not submit any bid.  On January 15, the day
before the bids were due, petitioner wrote a letter to Cajun Electric
telling it that MMR would not submit a bid, but instead would seek
work as a subcontractor.  Pet. App. 18a-20a, 22a n.2.  /2/

   Fischbach won the contract and, pursuant to its agreement, awarded
MMR a subcontract for $4.3 million, which included a $1.5 million
"fee" on top of MMR's cost of $2.8 million.  The subcontract price
that was submitted to Cajun Electric, however, was only $3.3 million.
The remaining $1 million was paid to MMR in the form of a fictitious
change order purporting to reflect additional work on the project
after it was under way.  Pet. App. 20a.

   2. The court of appeals affirmed.  It declined to consider
petitioner's claim that the trial court's instructions on withdrawal
were deficient for failing explicitly to state that, once evidence of
withdrawal was established, the burden was on the government to
disprove withdrawal beyond a reasonable doubt.  Pet. App. 31a-32a.
Rather, the court held that the defendants were not entitled to a
withdrawal instruction because there was no evidence to support it.
Id. at 32a.  The evidence on which the defendants had relied to show
withdrawal -- the letter to Cajun Electric notifying it of MMR's
decision not to bid -- was "hardly inconsistent with the object of the
conspiracy." Ibid., citing United States v. United States Gypsum Co.,
438 U.S. 422, 464-465 (1978).

   The court also held that MMR's alleged inability to obtain the
bonding necessary to submit a bid was not a defense to the Sherman Act
violation charged in the indictment.  Pet. App. 25a-29a.  Petitioner
and MMR claimed that, because MMR could not obtain bonding, it was not
a competitor of Fischbach and, therefore, a per se violation of the
Sherman Act could not be found.  The court of appeals rejected that
argument.  It pointed out that, even if MMR was not a competitor,
Fischbach and two other companies in the bid-rigging scheme were
competitors.  MMR's alleged status as a noncompetitor is irrelevant
because "a non-competitor can join a Sherman Act bidrigging conspiracy
among competitors." Id. at 28a.  Moreover, even if MMR was "arguably
unable in fact to carry out its competitive threat," it nevertheless
furthered the conspiracy among competitors.  Fischbach could not have
proceeded with its plan to submit rigged bids unless it was confident
that MMR would not submit a competitive bid.  By agreeing to
participate in the conspiracy and later assisting Fischbach in the
preparation of its rigged bid, MMR acted in furtherance of the
conspiracy.  Id. at 28a-29a.  /3/

                               ARGUMENT

   1. Petitioner claims that there is a conflict among the circuits on
the question whether a defendant bears the burden of proving that he
has withdrawn from a conspiracy, and that the conflict warrants
review.  Pet 8-13.  The court of appeals, however, found that this
case did not require resolution of that issue because the evidence did
not support giving a withdrawal instruction at all.  Accordingly, the
issue raised by petitioner is not presented by this case.  /4/

   Withdrawal from a conspiracy requires "'(a)ffirmative acts
inconsistent with the object of the conspiracy and communicated in a
manner reasonably calculated to reach coconspirators.'" Pet. App. 32a,
quoting United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 438 U.S. 422, 464
(1978).  The courts of appeals are in agreement that the burden of
going forward with the evidence of withdrawal is on the defendant.
See Pet. App. 32a;  United States v. Read, 658 F.2d 1225, 1236 (7th
Cir. 1981).  Petitioner's withdrawal argument is based on the letter
that MMR sent to Cajun Electric shortly before the bid letting in
which MMR stated that it was not going to submit a bid.  Pet. 7.  As
the court of appeals observed, however, that letter was entirely
consistent with the ultimate objective of the conspiracy.  Pet. App.
32a.  Fischbach organized the conspiracy and then recruited MMR to
join it because Fischbach wanted to be the winning bidder for the Unit
3 project.  Pet. App. 18a.  MMR's ultimate agreement not to submit a
bid eliminated it as a potential successful bidder and guaranteed the
success of the conspiracy.  Indeed, by falsely suggesting in the
letter to Cajun that MMR was submitting "competitive" subcontract
quotes to all the other bidders (GX 10), when in fact MMR had agreed
to an exclusive arrangement with Fischbach, the letter affirmatively
furthered the conspiracy by deceiving the bidding authorities.  /5/
Moreover, petitioner continued to participate in the conspiracy after
the bid date by negotiating with Fischbach for MMR's payoff on the
lucrative subcontract and by receiving that payoff.  See Pet. App.
20a, 23a.

   Under these circumstances, the court of appeals correctly concluded
that petitioner was not entitled to an instruction on the affirmative
defense of withdrawal.  Pet. App. 32a.  Because petitioner was not
entitled to an instruction on that issue, the court of appeals did not
have to consider the question of who should bear the burden of proof
on the issue of withdrawal.  Accordingly, the result in this case
would be the same even if petitioner were correct in asserting that
the government must bear the burden of proof on the affirmative
defense of withdrawal from a conspiracy.  /6/

   2. Petitioner claims that he was improperly convicted of illegal
bid-rigging on a per se theory (Pet. 13-23), but that claim rests on
erroneous assumptions of fact and law.

   Petitioner first contends that "(u)nder the holding of this case,
companies that cannot bid on the prime contract and elect to bid as
subcontractors are subjected to per se scrutiny under the Sherman
Act." Pet. 17.  Petitioner's suggestion that his conduct was nothing
more than the routine conduct of a subcontractor is belied by the
evidence presented at trial and relied on by the court of appeals.  By
its verdict, the jury found that petitioner and MMR had agreed with
Fischbach and others to rig the bids on the Unit 3 project.  Pet. App.
23a.  /7/ As a payoff for its participation in the conspiracy, MMR
received a "lucrative subcontract" from Fischbach.  Pet. App. 23a.
This case does not involve a legitimate subcontracting agreement but
rather conduct in furtherance of per se illegal bid-rigging agreement.
 Petitioner's observations on the virtues of legitimate subcontracting
(Pet. 15-19) are therefore irrelevant.  /8/

   In suggesting that his conduct "promoted competition" and
efficiency (Pet. 14, 19, 20-21), petitioner fails to provide any
pro-competition justification for the blatant bid-rigging in which he
engaged.  Price fixing is "the archetypal example" of conduct that is
"illegal without further examination under the rule of reason
generally applied in Sherman Act cases." Catalano, Inc. v. Target
Sales, Inc., 446 U.S. 643, 646-647 (1980) (per curiam).  See also FTC
v. Superior Court Trial Lawyers Ass'n, 110 S. Ct. 768, 780-781 (1990);
 National Society of Professional Engineers v. United States, 435 U.S.
679, 692 (1978);  accord Palmer v. BRG of Georgia, Inc. 111 S. Ct.
401, 402 (1990) (per curiam).  Petitioner's attempt to provide an
efficiency rationale for his conduct fails to address this fundamental
principle.

   Petitioner also renews his claim that he cannot be liable for a per
se violation because MMR purportedly lacked adequate bonding capacity
for the bid and thus was not a viable competitor of Fischbach.  Pet.
21-23.  This contention is also unvailing.  Even if petitioner's
characterization of the record is accepted, /9/ petitioner did not
participate only in an agreement between non-competitors.  As the
court of appeals explained, petitioner participated in and facilitated
a conspiracy between competitors.  See Pet. App. 28a-29a.  MMR,
moreover, clearly posed a "competitive threat," even if it was unable
to carry out the threat, and its agreement to participate in the
bid-rigging scheme was essential to ensuring the scheme's success.
Ibid.  Petitioner's assertion that his participation in the
bid-rigging conspiracy was "meaningless" (Pet. 21) is thus plainly
incorrect.  Accordingly, the court of appeals correctly determined
that petitioner was subject to per se liability for his role in the
price-fixing scheme.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   JAMES F. RILL

      Assistant Attorney General

   JUDY L. WHALLEY

      Deputy Assistant Attorney General

   JOHN J. POWERS, III

   ANDREA LIMMER

      Attorneys

   MARCH 1991

   /1/ Murphy had asked MMR to prepare a legitimate cost estimate so
that he could be sure that Fischbach had not made any mistakes in its
estimates.  Pet. App. 19a.

   /2/ Petitioner's letter stated that it would "quote certain areas
of the project as a subcontractor * * * to all prospective bidders."
GX 10.  In fact, there was no evidence that MMR submitted
subcontractor quotes to any bidder other than Fischbach.  27 Tr.
91-92, 103-106, 133-135.

   /3/ The court of appeals also rejected numerous other arguments
made by petitioner and MMR, including challenges to the sufficiency of
the evidence (Pet. App. 21a-23a), the trial court's unanimity
instruction (id. at 25a), various evidentiary rulings (id. at 23a-25a,
29a-31a, 32a-34a), and alleged prosecutorial misconduct (id. at
34a-37a).  Petitioner does not renew any of those arguments in this
Court.  He filed, however, a motion for a new trial alleging
prosecutorial misconduct;  the district court denied the motion, and
petitioner's appeal from that ruling is pending in the court of
appeals.

   /4/ In claiming a conflict on the issue that the court did not
reach, petitioner relies primarily on the Seventh Circuit's decision
in United States v. Read, 658 F.2d 1225 (1981), and maintains that the
decision is in conflict with decisions from almost all the other
courts of appeals.  Pet. 8-9.  We note that Read was not mentioned in
a recent Seventh Circuit decision, which observed that "the burden of
withdrawal lies on the defendant." United States v. Patel, 879 F.2d
292, 294 (7th Cir. 1989) (quoting United States v. Borelli, 336 F.2d
376, 388 (2d Cir. 1964) (Friendly, J.)), cert. denied, 110 S. Ct. 1318
(1990).  Petitioner also relies on Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197
(1977);  in Patterson, however, this Court expressly "decline(d) to
adopt as a constitutional imperative * * * that a State must disprove
beyond a reasonable doubt every fact constituting any and all
affirmative defenses related to the culpability of an accused," id. at
210, and upheld a conviction where the jury had been instructed that
the burden of proving the defense of extreme emotional disturbance was
on the defendant.  See also Martin v. Ohio, 480 U.S. 228 (1987).

   /5/ The letter was not inconsistent with the agreement to help
Fischbach win the contract;  it did not defeat the purpose of the
conspiracy to enable Fischbach to be the low bidder;  it was not
calculated to disclose the bid-rigging scheme to the authorities;  and
it was not even calculated to "reach co-conspirators" to advise them
of MMR's withdrawal.  See United States Gypsum Co., 438 U.S. at
464-465.

   /6/ We disagree with the court of appeals' observation (Pet. App.
31a n.3) that the district court's jury instructions placed the burden
of proof on the withdrawal issue on the defendants.  The district
court instructed that "(a) person can withdraw from a conspiracy by
taking some affirmative steps to terminate or abandon his
participation in, and efforts to promote, the conspiracy.  In other
words, the defendant must have demonstrated some type of positive
action which disavowed or defeated the purpose of the conspiracy.
Mere cessation of activity does not constitute withdrawal." 48 Tr. 74.
 The court also instructed the jury that "there is no requirement that
a defendant try to convince the other co-conspirators to abandon their
undertaking, or that he go to public authorities or others to expose
the conspiracy or to prevent the carrying out of an act involved in
the conspiracy." Id. at 75.  The court then "reminded (the jury) that
the burden remains on the government to prove, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that the defendants were members of the conspiracy." Ibid.  If
"it affirmatively appears from the evidence that (a defendant) in good
faith disavowed and completely withdrew from any participation in the
conspiracy * * * * prior to November 3, 1983 (the period of the
statute of limitations), you must find them not guilty." Id. at 76.
Finally, the court stated that the jury could not "find any of the
defendants guilty unless the government proves, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that the defendants were members of the charged conspiracy
sometime within the period beginning November 3, 1983, and endng
November 3, 1988." Id. at 76-77.  Thus, the court never charged that
the defendants bore the burden of proving withdrawal.  To the
contrary, the court emphasized throughout the charge that "(t)he
government has the burden of pro(v)ing every element of the charges
beyond a reasonable doubt, and if it fails to do so, you must find the
defendants not guilty." Id. at 36;  see also id. at 64-65, 75-77, 84.

   /7/ The jury was instructed that petitioner could be found guilty
only if the bid-rigging conspiracy charged in the indictment existed,
and that petitioner knowingly joined that conspiracy.  48 Tr. 63-66,
70.  The court instructed the jury (1) that it could not convict if
the decision not to submit a bid was the result of an independent
business decision (id. at 69);  (2) that discussions and exchanges of
information with Fischbach were not illegal in the absence of an
agreement to rig a bid (id. at 70);  and (3) that, in deciding whether
the alleged bid-rigging conspiracy existed, the jury could consider
whether MMR was capable of submitting a bid and whether it had
actually submitted a bid.  Id. at 68-69.

   /8/ Indeed, the conspiracy of which petitioner was convicted
undermines the very process that petitioner extols.  Not only did
petitioner and Fischbach rig the prime contract, but they subverted
competitive bidding on the subcontract as well.  Compare Pet. 15-19.
Fischbach did not award the electrical subcontract on the basis of
competitive bids;  it did not choose from among a host of prospective
subcontractors in order to select a "subcontract bid that represents
the most efficient combination of (various market factors)." Pet. 18.
Fischbach agreed to award MMR the subcontract as a payoff for helping
Fischbach rig a bid, even though MMR did not submit the lowest price
of all the subcontractors (17 Tr. 73;  32 Tr. 52-53;  58;  33 Tr.
85-86), and even though it meant paying MMR a huge markup on the
subcontract.

   /9/ The evidence does not support petitioner's premise that it
could not have obtained adequate bonding for the Big Cajun project.
While Aetna did deny MMR's request for a large bond, MMR did not try
to secure bonding or credit from other sources that had expressed a
willingness to help MMR (42 Tr. 192-193;  43 Tr. 22, 46), nor did it
appeal to Aetna to reconsider its decision.  Indeed, only a few months
after the bid date, Aetna increased MMR's bond limit for another
project (42 Tr. 117-120, 125-126), thus suggesting that MMR might have
persuaded Aetna to raise its bonding limits on the Big Cajun project.
MMR did not pursue any of those alternatives.
