{\rtf1\ansi {\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\cpg0\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\cpg1252\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\cpg1251\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\cpg1250\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\cpg1257\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\cpg1254\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\cpg1253\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\cpg1255\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\fswiss\cpg0\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f9\fswiss\cpg1252\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f10\fswiss\cpg1251\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f11\fswiss\cpg1250\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f12\fswiss\cpg1257\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f13\fswiss\cpg1254\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f14\fswiss\cpg1253\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f15\fswiss\cpg1255\fcharset177 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1505\margr1322\margt1394\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1553\margrsxn1322\margtsxn1394\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw5798\colsr811\colno2\colw2755 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs17 LAW OFFICES}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb226\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs31 JAN L. KODNER & ASSOCIATES, LTD.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri307\sb197\sa0\sl-245\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs19 53 WEST JACKSON BLVD., SUITE 515, CHICAGO, 1L 6O6O4 \expndtw6 312/922-6688     FAX 312/922-4494}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs19 JAN L. KODNER}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri4243\sb115\sa0\sl-206\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-7\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs19 LES DOMBAI \expndtw-9 JAMES LEENY}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri5\sb1411\sa0\sl-197\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs18 Practice concentrated in}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-197\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs18 Social Security Disability}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-197\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs18 Supplemental Security income Law}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li38\fi0\ri0\sb72\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs19 www.mysocialsecuritylawyer.com}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1505\margrsxn1322\margtsxn1394\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li14\fi0\ri0\sb1042\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 October 11,2005}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri5990\sb816\sa0\sl-278\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-7\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Commissioner of Social Security \expndtw-3 P.O. Box 17703 \expndtw-4 Baltimore, MD 21235-6401}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li19\fi0\ri0\sb259\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-7\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Dear Commissioner:}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri67\sb278\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 I am submitting this letter as comment upon your proposed Regulations to revamp the Social \expndtw-5 Security disability adjudication process. The proposed rule-making was published in the Federal Register at 70 Fed. Reg. 43589, 43590 (July 27, 2005).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri62\sb283\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 I have been an attorney since 1978 and have concentrated in the Social Security disability field \expndtw-2 since about 1982. My firm has handled many thousands of disability claims during that period of time. I have seen the efficiency of the Social Security Administration "wax and wane" over \expndtw-4 the years as far as processing time. One constant has been the fundamental fairness of the Office \expndtw-2 of Hearings \i & \i0 Appeals. I am very concerned that some of the proposals could handcuff this \expndtw-5 crucial safeguard to our most vulnerable population.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri62\sb269\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 It is very important to understand that a Social Security Claimant is not a typical party to an administrative proceeding. In my first few years of practice. I handled various types of Federal \expndtw-4 administrative claims, including proceedings before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and \expndtw-3 Illinois Secretary of State. The typical participant in any Federal administrative proceeding is \expndtw4 keenly aware of deadlines and shares information in a meaningful way with his/her \expndtw-3 representative. This is not always so with a Social Security disability Claimant.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri62\sb269\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Numerous disabled Claimants suffer from some type of mental illness, which impairs their \expndtw-3 ability to responsibly respond to deadlines, or even to obtain treatment. Even those individuals who are not mentally ill are frequently in a great deal of pain which impairs their ability to \expndtw-2 concentrate and take care of business. The disabled Claimant is under tremendous financial \expndtw-5 stressors as well, which can cause similar problems. Procedural requirements, deadlines, or even communications which would be routine to most persons can be overwhelming to the disabled \expndtw-9 Claimant.}\par \sect\sectd \sbkpage\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1461\margrsxn1409\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Commissioner of Social Security}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-10\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Page 2}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb5\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 October 11, 2005}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li715\fi0\ri0\sb571\sa0\tx1426 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-14\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 1.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw6 Proposed Change: 45 Day notice of hearing}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1430\fi0\ri0\sb278\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw2\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Comment: \b0 This is a very wise proposal which would give the Claimant and \expndtw-3 his representative more time to order and procure medical evidence. Since cases \expndtw-4 will sometimes take 6-24 months to schedule for hearing, the timely ordering of medical records is a "game of chance". For obvious reasons, records cannot be \expndtw-2 ordered and updated each month. We try to keep the Record relatively current \expndtw-4 based upon an educated guess as to when the case will be reviewed and screened for a possible favorable decision without a hearing, or scheduled for hearing. Our office tries to order records every 4-6 months. If the case is scheduled for hearing \expndtw-1 three weeks hence and the evidence is not fresh, it is difficult to get updated evidence in time for the hearing. Forty-five days would \b ordinarily \b0 be enough \expndtw-3 time to procure updated information. Sixty days would be even better. However, \expndtw-5 a 45 day minimum notice is clearly a step in the right direction. An unrepresented \expndtw-2 Claimant who receives such notice is more inclined to "spring into action" and \expndtw-5 may contact an attorney for the first time at that point. Likewise, an attorney who had been awaiting the appropriate opportunity to again obtain updated medical evidence will have ample time to actually obtain to actually obtain and furnish the \expndtw-4 evidence to the Administrative Law Judge before the hearing date. The Record would be more likely to be complete with a 45 day notice of hearing.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1426\fi-710\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx1426 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-16\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 2.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-4 Proposed Changed: Proposal to close the Record if evidence is not submitted\line within 20 days before the hearing.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1426\fi0\ri5\sb283\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw1\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Comment: \b0 This would be a serious mistake and would violate the universal \expndtw-5 rule that the ALJ must fully and fairly develop the Record. Any person who has \expndtw1 practiced in this area has encountered medical providers who are either \expndtw-3 uncooperative, overburdened or administratively inept. It will sometimes take \expndtw0 multiple requests from the representative to obtain such records. There are \expndtw-3 numerous instances where the records arrive within a day or two of the hearing \expndtw-1 request even when they had been requested months earlier and followed up diligently. There are also many instances where the Claimant changes doctors \expndtw2 and does not inform the attorney of the new medical provider or hospital \expndtw4 treatment. This occurs in spite of the admonitions of the representative, \expndtw-1 reminding the Claimant to keep them informed of medical developments. Of \expndtw-4 course, the chronically ill may require last minute treatment or testing which is \expndtw-5 simply not available at the time of hearing.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1430\fi0\ri24\sb259\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Again, please remember that the Claimants are frequently unsophisticated, \expndtw-5 marginally literate, mentally ill or may simply be too overwhelmed to grasp the \expndtw-3 significance of gelling back in touch with the representative. This is a major \expndtw-4 difference between representing a corporation or white collar administrative}\par \sect\sectd \sbkpage\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1437\margrsxn1428\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Commissioner of Social Security}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Page 3}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw2\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs22 October 11, 2005}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1426\fi0\ri24\sb283\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Claimant versus a disabled person seeking Social Security benefits. Development of a thorough and full Record is one of the cornerstones to a determination which \expndtw-5 is \b\ul fair\ul0  \b0 to both the disabled Claimant and the government. It would be extremely wrong and indeed a hollow victory to the Claimant to receive a quick denial rather \expndtw0 than a favorable but slower determination based upon a reasoned and fully \expndtw-5 developed Record.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li710\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0\tx1435 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-11\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 3.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-4 Proposed Change:    Decision Review Board}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1426\fi0\ri34\sb264\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw6\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Comment: \b0 The Appeals Council would be abolished under the current \expndtw-2 proposal in favor of a Decision Review Board under the current proposal. \expndtw0 Unfortunately, the Claimant would not be permitted to appeal to the DRB. \expndtw-4 Likewise, the Claimant could not submit argument if the case is being reviewed, \expndtw0 unless he is invited to do so. Submittal of new evidence of disability is very \expndtw-5 limited as well. The DRB will apparently be reviewing all cases to identify those \expndtw-4 most likely to be "error prone". This level of one way review is of great concern. \expndtw1 Categories of particular Claimants would appear to be subjected to special \expndtw-4 scrutiny regardless of the facts of their cases. Further, elimination of the Appeals \expndtw-2 Council would open up appeal of an unfavorable ALJ decision directly to the \expndtw-5 Federal District Court. Given the very heavy Federal caseload, there could be an \expndtw-2 explosion of Social Security disability appeals falling upon the already over \expndtw-5 burdened Federal Judiciary.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1435\fi-725\ri0\sb283\sa0\sl-274\slmult0\tx1435 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-12\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 4.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw0 Proposed Change:    Reopening.   Decisions can no longer be reopened for\line \expndtw-2 any reason within one year. New and material evidence is no longer a good\line \expndtw-3 cause for reopening.  Reopening for good cause can happen only six months\line \expndtw-4 of the final action on a claim.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1430\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0\sl-274\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw10\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Comment: \b0 Reopening in my experience has been a relatively rare \expndtw-5 phenomenon. When it has been applicable, there has almost always been a very strong reason. Most often, medical evidence had not been obtained either by the \expndtw-4 unrepresented Claimant or the Social Security Administration. The only affect of this proposed change would be a loss of benefits to the Claimant. Where this is a \expndtw-3 date last insured issue, the new rules would result in a total loss of eligibility for SSD benefits. I cannot fathom how reopening rules have contributed to any type \expndtw-4 of administrative inefficiency in the past and do not understand the benefit of the proposed change other than to separate worthy Claimants from their benefits.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb274\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b\i0\ul\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 CLOSING THOUGHTS;}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri29\sb269\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 It is very, very important to keep the relaxed and informal aspect of the Social Security disability \expndtw-1 hearing intact. Representatives and the ALJ's must have the ability to fully and fairly develop \expndtw-5 the Record without being shackled by onerous requirements to close the Record prior to hearing.}\par \sect\sectd \sbkpage\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1133\margrsxn1430\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li298\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Commissioner of Social Security}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li302\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-9\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Page 4}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li298\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw2\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs22 October 11, 2005}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li302\fi0\ri0\sb571\sa0\sl-264\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 In my experience, the delay in obtaining a decision by the ALJ is most often caused by one of \expndtw-6 several factors:}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1728\fi-720\ri0\sb283\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx1728 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-15\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 A.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-4 The District Office may take a very long time to forward the Claimant's file to the\line \expndtw-5 hearing office.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1008\fi0\ri0\sb250\sa0\tx1728 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-16\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 B.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-4 The hearing office takes a very long time to organize the file into Exhibits.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1728\fi-720\ri0\sb259\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx1728 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-19\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 C.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-3 The hearing office may not promptly assign the file to a Judge or senior attorney\line \expndtw-5 for review.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1008\fi0\ri0\sb274\sa0\tx1728 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-18\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 D.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-4 Some ALJ's are much more productive than others:}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2458\fi-725\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-274\slmult0\tx2458 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-12\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25  (1)\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2458\fi-725\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-274\slmult0\tx2458 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent725\pnf1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-12\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 There are some "black hole" ALJ's who are assigned to a case but never\line \expndtw-5 seem to be able to take action upon same for over 2 1/2-3 years.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2458\fi-725\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx2458 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-12\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25  (2)\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2458\fi-725\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx2458 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent725\pnf1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-12\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 There are also some ALJ's who cannot seem to make a decision for many\line \expndtw0 months after the Record is complete and the hearing has been held.   In\line \expndtw-4 some cases, the decision may take more than a year to be issued.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2458\fi-725\ri0\sb274\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx2458 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-9\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25  (3)\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2458\fi-725\ri0\sb274\sa0\sl-278\slmult0\tx2458 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent725\pnf1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-9\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Claimant's often express great frustration that they are held to strict time\line \expndtw-5 deadlines whereas the Social Security Administration (at all levels) is not.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li307\fi0\ri24\sb283\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 In my experience, post hearing closure of the Record does not create a delay of more than a few weeks when it does occur. This is an \b\ul extremely minor\ul0  \b0 part of the overall delays inherent in this \expndtw-9 system.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li307\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 Thank you for this opportunity to comment upon the proposed Regulatory changes.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li307\fi0\ri0\sb278\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw3\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Respectfully submitted,}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1426\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex65\expndtw22\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 /   /   \i '}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li77\fi230\ri7603\sb658\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw1\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 Jan L. Kodner \expndtw13 / JLK/vj}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li43\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\f9\cchs0\lang1033\fs12 /}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex74\expndtw0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs23 /}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1022\fi-715\ri5491\sb0\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\f1\cchs0\lang1033\fs25 cc:       U.S. Senator Barack H. Obama \expndtw-4 U.S. Senator Richard Durbin U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky}\par }