65 FR 37115 June 13, 2000 

[A-423-602; C-508-605]

 
Revocation of Antidumping Duty Order: Industrial Phosphoric Acid 
From Belgium; and Revocation Countervailing Duty Order: Industrial 
Phosphoric Acid From Israel

AGENCY: Import Administration, International Trade Administration, 
Department of Commerce.

ACTION: Notice of revocation of antidumping duty order: industrial 
phosphoric acid from Belgium; and revocation countervailing duty order: 
industrial phosphoric acid from Israel.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: Pursuant to section 751(c) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as 
amended (``the Act''), the United States International Trade Commission 
(``the Commission'') determined that revocation of the antidumping and 
countervailing duty orders on industrial phosphoric acid from Belgium 
and Israel is not likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of 
material injury to an industry in the United States within a reasonably 
foreseeable time (65 FR 35395 (June 2, 2000)). Therefore, pursuant to 
section 751(d)(2) of the Act and 19 CFR 351.222(i)(1), the Department 
of Commerce (``the Department'') is revoking the antidumping and 
countervailing duty orders on industrial phosphoric acid from Belgium 
and Israel. Pursuant to section 751(c)(6)(A)(iv) of the Act and 19 CFR 
351.222(i)(2)(ii), the effective date of revocation is January 1, 2000.

DATES: Effective Date: January 1, 2000.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Eun W. Cho or James Meader, Office of 
Policy for Import Administration, International Trade Administration, 
U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and Constitution Ave., NW,

[[Page 37116]]

Washington, DC 20230; telephone: (202) 482-1698 or (202) 482-3330, 
respectively.

Background

    March 1, 1999, the Department initiated, and the Commission 
instituted, sunset reviews (64 FR 9970 and 64 FR 10017, respectively) 
of the antidumping and countervailing duty orders on industrial 
phosphoric acid from Belgium and Israel, pursuant to section 751(c) of 
the Act. As a result of the reviews, the Department found that 
revocation of the antidumping duty order would likely lead to 
continuation or recurrence of dumping and notified the Commission of 
the magnitude of the margins likely to prevail were the orders to be 
revoked. \1\ In addition, the Department determined that revocation of 
the countervailing duty order would likely lead to continuation or 
recurrence of countervailable subsidies and notified the Commission of 
the net countervailable subsidies likely to prevail were the order 
revoked. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ See Final Results of Full Sunset Review: Industrial 
Phosphoric Acid From Belgium, 65 FR 3661 (January 24, 2000).
    \2\ See Final Results of Full Sunset Review: Industrial 
Phosphoric Acid From Israel, 65 FR 6163 (February 8, 2000).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    On May 22, 2000, the Commission determined, pursuant to section 
751(c) of the Act, that revocation of the antidumping and 
countervailing duty orders on industrial phosphoric acid from Belgium 
and Israel would not likely lead to continuation or recurrence of 
material injury to an industry in the United States within a reasonably 
foreseeable time. (See USITC Publication 3302, Investigations Nos. 701-
TA-286 (Review) and 731-TA-365 (Review) (May 2000) and Industrial 
Phosphoric Acid from Israel and Belgium, 65 FR 35395 (June 2, 2000).)

Scope of the Orders

    The merchandise subject to this antidumping duty order is 
industrial phosphoric acid (``IPA'') from Belgium and Israel. IPA is 
currently classifiable under item number 2809.20.00 of the Harmonized 
Tariff Schedule of the United States (``HTSUS'').
    Although the HTSUS subheadings are provided for convenience and 
customs purposes, the written description remains dispositive.

Determination

    As a result of the determination by the Commission that revocation 
of these antidumping and countervailing duty orders is not likely to 
lead to continuation or recurrence of material injury to an industry in 
the United States, the Department, pursuant to section 751(d)(2) of the 
Act and 19 CFR 351.222(i)(1), is revoking the antidumping and 
countervailing duty orders on industrial phosphoric acid from Belgium 
and Israel. Pursuant to section 751(c)(6)(A)(iv) of the Act and 19 CFR 
351.222(i)(2)(ii), this revocation is effective on January 1, 2000.
    The Department will instruct the U.S. Customs Service to 
discontinue the suspension of liquidation and collection of cash 
deposits rate and to refund with interest any cash deposits on entries 
of the subject merchandise entered or withdrawn from warehouse on or 
after January 1, 2000 (the effective date). The Department will 
complete any pending administrative reviews of these orders and will 
conduct administrative reviews of subject merchandise entered prior to 
the effective date of revocation in response to appropriately filed 
requests for review.

    Dated: June 7, 2000.
Troy H. Cribb,
Acting Assistant Secretary for Import Administration.
[FR Doc. 00-14893 Filed 6-12-00; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3510-DS-P



