{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\uc1{\fonttbl{\f0\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl
;\red153\green153\blue153 ;\red76\green76\blue76 ;\red0\green0\blue255 ;}{\stylesheet
{\s0\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\kerning28 Normal;}}\paperw12240
\paperh15840\margt864\margl1800\margr1800\margb864\headery720\footery864\deftab720
\pgnstart1\viewkind1\viewscale100\fet0{\*\docvar{ColorSet}{-1}}{\*\docvar{ColorPos
}{-1}}{\*\docvar{StyleSet}{-1}}{\*\docvar{StylePos}{-1}}\pard\plain\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20
\brdrcf1\li5040{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28{\header\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow
\sl240\slmult1\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\fs20\par}{\footer\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow
\sl240\slmult1\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\fs20\par}Todd Ewert\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Joseph Lovejoy\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Small Business, CDLP &  Group Benefits\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 FTC Company Compliance\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 2269  Lyell Avenue\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Rochester , New York 14606\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Phone (585)746-9274\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Fax (585) 473-1419\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\ul\f0\cf3\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Landofopportunity@hotmail.com{\ulnone\cf0\par
}}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\ul\f0\cf3\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Upbizbuilders@aol.com\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28 July
 13, 2008\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28     \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28 N.Y
. State Comptroller\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab                                                                                                                                                     
\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28  Dear
 Sir:\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab
\tab\tab\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28       
I was asked by the Town of Bristol Supervisor to put this formal briefing together
 so that you may have a better understanding of what I am trying to propose to the
 Town Boards and town citizens of Bristol, Richmond, and Hopewell.\tab\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28      
The towns all have an account set up by each Town Board in which the funds were 
a result of increasing assessments to gain more tax money to fund projects. I know
 that everyone states that taxes and assessments are not related, but in fact if
 you truly look at the information that I have provided with this letter you will
 see that they do go hand in hand. For example: the Town of Richmond would like 
to build a new Town Hall. They currently have in their account $610,000.00 that 
was accumulated over the last couple of years by collecting money from the taxpayers
. This money sits in an account waiting to be used to fund projects. They have only
 accrued enough money to fund Phase 1 of the project. \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28      
Their plan is to raise the assessments on property owners to provide enough money
 to complete Phase 2 of the project. The taxpayers must vote on this proposal to
 decide whether this is the right way to create the funding for the project. The
 problem that we have is that if enough money is not raised to do this, then the
 town will request for a bond to pay for it. The longer the bond term, the lower
 the interest rate. Now a new problem has arisen. The town must now pay for a bond
 in which they must raise the money to pay for the bond and they will end up spending
 at least 3 times more than what they had originally planned to spend so that they
 may keep the interest rate down. It just keeps turning into a snowball effect. 
I am sure that you understand where I am going with this. \tab\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28      
The Town of Bristol currently provided the funding of their new Town Hall by using
 partial money out of their account and taking on a bond that they currently owe
 $900,000.00 and have a remaining 29 years left to pay on it. The bond loans only
 provide a temporary solution for any projects, because it is a simpler way of providing
 funding without putting all the burden on the taxpayers right up front. But in 
actuality, the terms of the bonds end  up costing the taxpayers more in the long
 term. The Town of Bristol still has other projects to be completed but  they must
 find a way of completing the projects without putting the heavy burden on the towns
 people.\tab\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28       
Each town you see runs into the same problems, and it only continues year after 
year. Everything always seems to take a long time to get resolved, and it usually
 always costs the taxpayers more and only adds stress to the Town Board members 
trying to figure out a solution on how to fix this problem. If you will take a moment
 to pay attention to what I propose, you will then see what I have put together 
that can solve problems for not only towns, but many other issues going on in our
 States. Some towns find ways of eliminating their debt by cutting spending, laying
 off workers, or by taking longer term bonds/loans out to cut costs down.\tab\tab
\tab                                                    \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28       
I have invested into a company which allows me to operate as an independent as long
 as I represent the two company\u8217\'92s in a legal and moral way.  I have provided
 the information about these two entities that merged together in July of 2003 enclosed
 in this packet.  According to the company, you cannot profit by paying for the 
services for another to have. This would be an act of fraud, and would mean severe
 punishment. But, the act of fraud is not being committed because the money in the
 accounts to be used for the funding of the services plan for all has been provided
 by the people for the people. It is a win situation for all.   As long as the Town
 Board members are willing to sign a\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28  \par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Todd Ewert\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Joseph Lovejoy\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Small Business, CDLP &  Group Benefits\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 FTC Company Compliance\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 2269  Lyell Avenue\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Rochester , New York 14606\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Phone (585)746-9274\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Fax (585) 473-1419\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\ul\f0\cf3\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Landofopportunity@hotmail.com{\ulnone\cf0\par
}}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\ul\f0\cf3\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Upbizbuilders@aol.com\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28 waiver
 stating that they are willing to be vested in the companys; that they will forfeit
 any money that they would receive and allow this money to go into a charitable 
account for the townspeople; then the ongoing issues that arise year after year 
can be resolved.  The funds that are in each towns accounts were provided by the
 taxpayers. This only means that the taxpayers are using their own money in their
 account to provide the funding for their own services.  \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28           
The townspeople not only will provide themselves with protection from anti-U.S. 
countries, but receive an equal justice benefits plan and will. Those that could
 no longer afford a will, can now provide peace of mind for their families. The 
money that was used up front out of the account to provide for the first months 
memberships is replaced back into the account, and the bonus money is deposited 
into the account the following month on the 15{\super th}. This money is a one time
 payout that is known as \u8220\'93Payed As Earned\u8221\'94. Out of the bonus money
, the remaining 11 months memberships can be funded by this. Now the taxpayers have
 provided themselves with a benefits plan, extra money to provide funding for projects
 in their towns without raising their assessments or taxes. The employees of the
 towns will have equal representation as of those who live in the town. No more 
bonds would need to be required to fund projects and the extra funds can be used
 to  pay off the old bonds. The extra funds could be put into a \u8220\'93Jumbo\u8221
\'94 to earn interest which can provide the funding for the renewal of the memberships
 come the 13{\super th} month. By then, the commissions and bonus, plus cumulative
 overrides would kick in again as a one time \u8220\'93Payed As Earned\u8221\'94
 plan. \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28     
Also, now that the memberships are renewed  again, the company provides a residual
 to be payed out on the 15{\super th} month of every year as long as the memberships
 keep a 100% persistency rating. Now you have new money on the table to be used 
to fund projects. The memberships are willable, so now there will be a constant 
residual year after year. The town could benefit more and hopefully create a new
 tax write off. The state could work together with a township now by allowing a 
tax break because the town did not require any funding from the state. This means
 that the state could use the extra funding for another problem within the state
.  The ironic part of this idea that will work is that the towns are looking to 
build town halls for a better justice system. Not only does the state look good 
as far as it\u8217\'92s numbers and fixing problems within it\u8217\'92s parameters
, but the towns look good and it promotes the company too. Now more people are aware
 of what is available for them out there.  The economy needs improvement, consumer
 spending is down and the overall consumer confidence is hurting, however; with 
this plan you will see the economy improve; jobs will not be lost, and tourism is
 increased providing wealth for a business in our region. And as I reiterate this
, our State becomes one of the most viable places to live in.\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28         
Here are the figures:  The Bookkeeper receives a legal plan membership & I.D. Theft
 plan & enrolls into the company to become an Associate. This person then enrolls
 29 town employees under them to become Associates with a 2 plan membership. The
 total cost for this is: $3,988.50 .  The Bookkeeper now becomes a Sr. Associate
 and will receive a commission of $2,514.05 .  These 29 people will then enroll 
38 people each under them with a 2 plan. The cost for 1,102 plans= $37,412.90 .  
These 29 people now become Executive Directors and will receive a commission and
 bonus of $11,556.16 .  The plan is now complete and the Sr. Associate now can receive
 a 1 time bonus total of $708,500.00. All the money will be paid out on the 15{\super
th} of the following month.  The upfront cost for the first month totals= $41,401
.40 .  \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Todd Ewert\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Joseph Lovejoy\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Small Business, CDLP &  Group Benefits\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 FTC Company Compliance\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 2269  Lyell Avenue\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Rochester , New York 14606\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Phone (585)746-9274\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\f0\cf2\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Fax (585) 473-1419\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\ul\f0\cf3\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Landofopportunity@hotmail.com{\ulnone\cf0\par
}}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\brdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brsp20\brdrcf1\li5040
{\ul\f0\cf3\lang1033\fs16\kerning28 Upbizbuilders@aol.com\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28\par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28        
The money that would be receivable totals=$1,046,142.69.  Out of the receivables
 you must then pay for 11 months of memberships for all 1,132 people which totals
=$422,745.40.  The total amounts for the plan to work total=$464,146.80.  Receivables
=$1,046,142.69 - $464,146.80=$581,995.89 positive revenue.  Take $581,995.89 and
 put this into a 364 day \u8220\'93Jumbo\u8221\'94 and receive an extra $18,000.
00 in interest based around a 3% interest plan.  Now repeat the plan over again 
for the following year. On the 13{\super th} month, when you renew the memberships
, residual will now kick in on the 15{\super th} month providing an extra $46,412
.00 a year as long as the membership renewals remain at 100% persistency.  The total
 amount after the 15{\super th} month for the first year will = roughly: $646,407
.89.  The numbers will grow higher year after year, and the more memberships there
 are, the higher the gross revenue is.  \par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28         
Please contact me directly to discuss the above listed figures and determine the
 best plan for the towns prior to each towns voting date.  We need to implement 
this plan as soon as possible to help prevent the towns from wasting more money. 
The company reserves the right to eliminate the bonus of $708,500.00 when they feel
 it is no longer needed to stimulate growth. The Town of Richmond is having their
 vote on Tuesday July 15{\super th} , 2008 at 7:00 p.m.  I know that this is a short
 timeline, but knowing that the plan I have created will work; we could propose 
this idea to function before any existing plans progress. This plan can be instituted
 and completed within a week from the start of inception. Let\u8217\'92s make this
 happen as soon as possible to create a positive attitude for all. If you refer 
to the Town of Richmond\u8217\'92s recorded meeting minutes, you will see that the
 attendance was that of 5 people and one person was stated as saying that \u8220
\'93 anything that happens would be an improvement to the town \u8220\'93.  \par
}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28        
It\u8217\'92s pretty sad to see that there is a low morale and that almost nobody
 cares what happens in our towns or states. We should be proud to be Americans and
 take pride in what we stand for; \u8220\'93 The land of the free and home of the
 brave. \u8220\'93 I could go on with more motto\u8217\'92s, but I feel that now
 is not the right time until once the issues that we are addressing can be fixed
; we can then feel proud to proclaim once again what this land was founded on. You
 may reach me directly at 585-746-9274. \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab
\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28 Sincerely
,\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab
\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab
\tab\tab\tab\par}

\pard\nowidctlpar\nooverflow\sl240\slmult1\ri360{\f0\lang1033\fs20\kerning28 Todd
 Ewert\tab}}