               National Institutes of Health
           National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
               Facts About Sickle Cell Anemia

What Is Sickle Cell Anemia?

Sickle cell anemia is an inherited blood disorder, characterized
primarily by chronic anemia and periodic episodes of pain.  The
underlying problem involves hemoglobin, a component of the red
cells in the blood.  The hemoglobin molecules in each red blood
cell carry oxygen from the lungs to the body organs and tissues
and bring back carbon dioxide to the lungs. 

In sickle cell anemia, the hemoglobin is defective.  After the
hemoglobin molecules give up their oxygen, some of them may
cluster together and form long, rod-like structures.  These
structures cause the red blood cells to become stiff and to
assume a sickle shape.  Unlike normal red cells, which are
usually smooth and donut-shaped, the sickled red cells cannot
squeeze through small blood vessels.  Instead, they stack up and
cause blockages that deprive the organs and tissue of
oxygen-carrying blood.  This process produces the periodic
episodes of pain and ultimately can damage the tissues and vital
organs and lead to other serious medical problems. 

Unlike normal red blood cells, which last about 120 days in the
bloodstream, sickled red cells die after only about 10 to 20
days.  Because they cannot be replaced fast enough, the blood is
chronically short of red blood cells, a condition called anemia. 

What Causes Sickle Cell Anemia? 

Sickle cell anemia is caused by an error in the gene that tells
the body how to make hemoglobin.  The defective gene tells the
body to make the abnormal hemoglobin that results in deformed red
blood cells.  

Children who inherit copies of the defective gene from both
parents will have sickle cell anemia.  Children who inherit the
defective sickle hemoglobin gene from only one parent will not
have the disease, but will carry the sickle cell trait. 
Individuals with sickle cell trait generally have no symptoms,
but they can pass the sickle hemoglobin gene on to their
children. 

The error in the hemoglobin gene results from a genetic mutation
that occurred many thousands of years ago in people in parts of
Africa, the Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and India.  A
deadly form of malaria was very common at that time, and malaria
epidemics caused the death of great numbers of people.  Studies
show that in areas where malaria was a problem, children who
inherited one sickle hemoglobin gene--and who, therefore, carried
the sickle cell trait--had a survival advantage:  unlike the
children who had normal hemoglobin genes, they survived the
malaria epidemics; they grew up, had their own children, and
passed on the gene for sickle hemoglobin.  As populations
migrated, the sickle cell mutation spread to other Mediterranean
areas, further into the Middle East, and eventually into the
Western Hemisphere.  

In the United States and other countries where malaria is not a
problem, the sickle hemoglobin gene no longer provides a survival
advantage.  Instead, it may be a serious threat to the carrier's
children, who may inherit two abnormal sickle hemoglobin genes
and have sickle cell anemia.

Graphic missing

The sickle-shaped red blood cells tend to get stuck in narrow
blood vessels, blocking the flow of blood.


How Common Is Sickle Cell Anemia? 

Sickle cell anemia affects millions of people throughout the
world.  It is particularly common among people whose ancestors
come from sub-Saharan Africa; Spanish-speaking regions (South
America, Cuba, Central America); Saudi Arabia; India; and
Mediterranean countries, such as Turkey, Greece, and Italy.  

In this country, it affects approximately 72,000 people,  most of
whose ancestors come from Africa.  The disease occurs in
approximately 1 in every 500 African-American births and 1 in
every 1,000-1,400 Hispanic-American births. Approximately 2
million Americans, or 1 in 12 African Americans, carry the sickle
cell trait.  

What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Sickle Cell Anemia? 

The clinical course of sickle cell anemia does not follow a
single pattern; some patients have mild symptoms, and some have
very severe symptoms.  However, the basic problem is the
same--the sickle-shaped red blood cells tend to get stuck in
narrow blood vessels, blocking the flow of blood.

Graphic missing


The presence of two defective genes (SS) is needed for sickle
cell anemia.  If each parent carries one sickle hemoglobin gene
(S) and one normal gene (A), with each pregnancy, there is a 25
percent chance of the child's inheriting two defective genes and
having sickle cell anemia; a 25 percent chance of inheriting two
normal genes and not having the disease; and a 50 percent chance
of being an unaffected carrier like the parents.



This results in the following conditions:

* Hand-foot syndrome.  When the small blood vessels in the  hands
or feet are blocked, pain and swelling can result,  along with
fever.  This may be the first symptom of sickle  cell anemia in
infants. 

* Fatigue, paleness, and shortness of breath--all symptoms  of
anemia, or a shortage of red blood cells.

* Pain that occurs unpredictably in any body organ or joint, 
wherever the sickled blood cells block oxygen flow to the 
tissues.  The frequency and amount of pain varies.  Some 
patients have painful episodes (also called crises) less  than
once a year, and some have as many as 15 or even more  episodes
in a year.  Sometimes the pain lasts only a few  hours; sometimes
it lasts several weeks.  For especially  severe, ongoing pain,
the patient may have to be  hospitalized and treated with
painkillers and intravenous  fluids.  Pain is the principal
symptom of sickle cell   anemia in both children and adults.

* Eye problems.  When the retina, the "film" at the back of  the
eye that receives and processes visual images, does  not get
enough nourishment from circulating red blood  cells, it can
deteriorate.  Damage to the retina can be  serious enough to
cause blindness.

* Yellowing of the skin and eyes.  These are signs of  jaundice,
resulting from the rapid breakdown of red blood  cells.

* Delayed growth and puberty in children and often a slight 
build in adults.  The slow rate of growth is caused by a 
shortage of red blood cells.

* Infections. In general, both children and adults with  sickle
cell anemia are more vulnerable to infections and  have a harder
time fighting them off once they start.   This is the result of
damage to the spleen from the  sickled red cells which prevents
the spleen from  destroying bacteria in the blood.  Infants and
young  children, especially, are susceptible to bacterial 
infections that can kill them in as little as 9 hours from onset
of fever.  Pneumococcal infections used to be the  principal
cause of death in young children with sickle  cell anemia until
physicians began routinely giving  penicillin on a preventive
basis to infants who are  identified at birth or in early infancy
as having sickle  cell anemia. 

* Stroke.  The defective hemoglobin damages the walls of the  red
blood cells, causing them to stick to blood vessel  walls.  This
can result in the development of narrowed, or  blocked, small
blood vessels in the brain, causing a  serious, life-threatening
stroke.  This type of stroke  occurs primarily in children.

* Acute chest syndrome--a life-threatening complication of 
sickle cell anemia, similar to pneumonia, that is caused  by
infection or trapped sickled cells in the lung.  This  is
characterized by chest pain, fever, and an abnormal  chest x ray. 


How Is Sickle Cell Anemia Detected?  

Early diagnosis of sickle cell anemia is critical so that
children who have the disease can receive proper treatment.  

More than 40 states now perform a simple, inexpensive blood test
for sickle cell disease on all newborn infants.  This test is
performed at the same time and from the same blood samples as
other routine newborn screening tests. Hemoglobin electrophoresis
is the most widely used diagnostic test.  

If the test shows the presence of sickle hemoglobin, a second
blood test is performed to confirm the diagnosis. These tests
also tell whether the child carries the sickle cell trait.

How Is Sickle Cell Anemia Treated?  

Although there is no cure for sickle cell anemia, doctors can do
a great deal to help sickle cell patients, and treatment is
constantly being improved.  Basic treatment of painful crises
relies heavily on pain-killing drugs and oral and intravenous
fluids to reduce pain and prevent complications. 

Blood transfusions are used to treat and to prevent some of the
complications of sickle cell anemia.  Transfusions correct anemia
by increasing the number of normal red blood cells in
circulation.  Transfusions are used to treat spleen enlargement
in children before the condition becomes life-threatening. 
Regular transfusion therapy also can help prevent recurring
strokes in children at high risk of crippling nervous system
complications.

Giving young children with sickle cell anemia oral penicillin
twice a day, beginning when the child is about 2 months old and
continuing until the child is at least 5 years old, can prevent
pneumococcal infection and early death in these children. 
Recently, however, several new strains of pneumonia bacteria that
are resistant to penicillin have been reported.  Since the
vaccines for these bacteria are ineffective in young children,
studies are being planned to test new vaccines.

The first effective drug treatment for adults with severe sickle
cell anemia was reported in early 1995, when a study conducted by
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute showed that daily
doses of the anticancer drug hydroxyurea reduced the frequency of
painful crises and of acute chest syndrome in these patients. 
Patients taking the drug also needed fewer blood transfusions. 
The long-term side effects of hydroxyurea and its effects in
children with sickle cell anemia are still being studied.
Graphic missing 

The abnormal hemoglobin molecules tend to cluster together and
form long, rod-like structures.  These structures cause some red
blood cells to become stiff and to assume a sickle shape.



Sickle cell anemia patients with severe chest or back pain that
prevents them from breathing deeply may be able to avoid
potentially serious lung complications associated with acute
chest syndrome by using an incentive spirometer.  This is a small
plastic device, shaped like a tube, with a ball inside.  The
patient must breathe into it hard enough to force the ball up the
tube, so using it helps the patient breathe more deeply.

Most complications of sickle cell anemia are treated as they
occur. For example, laser coagulation and other types of eye
surgery may be used to prevent further vision loss inpatients
with eye problems.  Surgery may be recommended for certain kinds
of organ damage--for example, to remove gallstones or replace a
hip joint.  Leg ulcers may be treated with cleansing solutions
and zinc oxide, or with skin grafts if the condition persists.  

Regular health maintenance is critical for people with sickle
cell anemia.  Proper nutrition, good hygiene, bed rest,
protection against infections, and avoidance of other stresses
all are important in maintaining good health and preventing
complications.  Regular visits to a physician or clinic that
provides comprehensive care are necessary to identify early 
changes in the patient's health and ensure that the person
receives immediate treatment.  

Today, with good health care, many people with sickle cell anemia
are in reasonably good health much of the time and living
productive lives.  In fact, in the past 30 years, the life
expectancy of people with sickle cell anemia has increased.  Many 
patients with sickle cell anemia now live into their midforties
and beyond. 

The Future of Sickle Cell Anemia Treatment

Scientists have learned a great deal about sickle cell anemia
during the past 30 years--what causes it, how it affects the
patient, and how to treat some of the complications.  They also
have begun to have success in developing drugs that will prevent
the symptoms of sickle cell anemia and procedures that should
ultimately provide a cure.  

Some researchers are focusing on identifying drugs that will
increase the level of fetal hemoglobin in the blood.  Fetal
hemoglobin is a form of hemoglobin that all humans produce before
birth, but most stop making shortly after birth. Most humans have
little fetal hemoglobin left in their bloodstream by the time
they reach the age of 6 months. However, some people with sickle
cell anemia continue to produce large amounts of fetal hemoglobin
after birth, and studies have shown that these people have less
severe cases of the disease.  Fetal hemoglobin seems to prevent
sickling of red cells, and cells containing fetal hemoglobin tend
to survive longer in the bloodstream.  Hydroxyurea appears to
work primarily by stimulating production of fetal hemoglobin. 
There is some evidence that administering hydroxyurea with
erythropoietin, a genetically engineered hormone that stimulates
red cell production, may make hydroxyurea work better.  This
combination approach offers the possibility that lower doses of
hydroxyurea can be used to achieve the needed level of fetal
hemoglobin. However, both of these drugs may produce serious side
effects, so researchers continue to search for safer agents that
are just as effective.

Butyrate, a simple fatty acid that is widely used as a food
additive, is also being investigated as an agent that may
increase fetal hemoglobin production. 

Clotrimazole, an over-the-counter medication commonly used to
treat fungal infections, is under investigation as a treatment to
prevent the loss of water from the red blood cells that
contributes to sickling.  It is hoped that this medication, used
alone or in conjunction with other antisickling agents, may
eventually offer an effective long-term therapy for sickle cell
anemia patients.  

Bone marrow transplantation has been shown to provide a cure for
severely affected children with sickle cell disease. Although
many of the risks of this procedure have been reduced, it still
is not entirely without risk.  In addition, the marrow must come
from a healthy matched sibling donor, and only about 18 percent
of children with sickle cell anemia are likely to have a matched
sibling. Researchers are working on techniques to further reduce
some of the risks of bone marrow transplantation for patients
with sickle cell disease.  

The ultimate cure for sickle cell anemia may be gene therapy.  In
sickle cell anemia, the gene which switches on production of
adult hemoglobin shortly before birth, is defective.  Two
approaches to gene therapy are being explored.  Some scientists
are looking into whether correcting this gene and inserting it
into the bone marrow of people with sickle cell anemia will
result in the production of normal adult hemoglobin.  Others are
looking at the possibility of turning off the defective gene and
simultaneously reactivating another gene that turns on production
of fetal hemoglobin.  In both cases, the research is at a very
early stage.  Progress is being made, however, and there is a
real possibility of  an eventual clinical cure for sickle cell
anemia.  

Although the genetic defect that causes sickling was identified
more than 40 years ago, until very recently, research into the
development of treatments for the disease was hampered by the
lack of an animal model that could be used to test experimental
drugs and gene therapy.  Recently, however, scientists were able
to genetically engineer a line of mice that exhibit some of the
characteristics of sickle cell disease in much the same way
humans do.  This is an important advance in the search for an
effective treatment and eventual cure for sickle cell disease.

How Can Patients and Their Families and Friends Be Helped To Cope
with Sickle Cell Anemia?

Sickle cell patients and their families may need help in handling
the economic and psychological stresses of coping with this
serious chronic disease.  Sickle cell centers and clinics can
provide information and counseling on handling these problems.  
Parents should try to learn as much about the disease as possible
so that they can recognize early signs of complications and seek
early treatment.  

Is It Possible To Detect Sickle Cell Anemia in an Unborn Baby?

Yes.  By sampling the amniotic fluid or tissue taken from the
placenta, doctors can tell whether a fetus has sickle cell anemia
or sickle cell trait.  This test can be done as early as the
first trimester of pregnancy.  

What Should Future Parents Know?

People who are planning to become parents should know whether
they are carriers of the sickle cell gene, and, if they are, they
may want to seek genetic counseling.  The counselor can tell
prospective parents what the chances are that their child will
have sickle cell trait or sickle cell anemia.  Accurate
diagnostic tests and information are available from health
departments, neighborhood health centers, medical centers and
clinics that care for individuals with sickle cell anemia.

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:
NHLBI Information Center
P.O. Box 30105
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105
(301) 592-8573

The Sickle Cell Disease Program Division of Blood Diseases and
Resources
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
II Rockledge Centre 
6701 Rockledge Drive MSC 7950
Bethesda, MD 20892-7950
301-435-0055 

Sickle Cell Disease Association of America 
4221 Wilshire Boulevard 
Los Angeles, CA 90010
1-800-421-8453

National Maternal and Child Health Clearinghouse
8201 Greensboro Drive
Suite 600
McLean, VA 22102
703-821-8955

Agency for Health Care Policy and Research
Executive Office Center Suite 501
AHCPR Clearinghouse
P.O. Box 8547
Silver Spring, MD 20907
1-800-358-9295

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Public Health Service
National Institutes of Health
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

NIH Publication No. 96-4057

November 1996