FR Doc E7-6617
[Federal Register: April 9, 2007 (Volume 72, Number 67)]
[Notices]               
[Page 17526-17527]
From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:fr09ap07-48]                         

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

 
Notice of Proposed Information Collection Requests

AGENCY: Department of Education.

SUMMARY: The IC Clearance Official, Regulatory Information Management 
Services, Office of Management, invites comments on the proposed 
information collection requests as required by the Paperwork Reduction 
Act of 1995.

DATES: Interested persons are invited to submit comments on or before 
June 8, 2007.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Section 3506 of the Paperwork Reduction Act 
of 1995 (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) requires that the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) provide interested Federal agencies and the public an 
early opportunity to comment on information collection requests. OMB 
may amend or waive the requirement for public consultation to the 
extent that public participation in the approval process would defeat 
the purpose of the information collection, violate State or Federal 
law, or substantially interfere with any agency's ability to perform 
its statutory obligations. The IC Clearance Official, Regulatory 
Information Management Services, Office of Management, publishes that 
notice containing proposed information collection requests prior to 
submission of these requests to OMB. Each

[[Page 17527]]

proposed information collection, grouped by office, contains the 
following: (1) Type of review requested, e.g. new, revision, extension, 
existing or reinstatement; (2) Title; (3) Summary of the collection; 
(4) Description of the need for, and proposed use of, the information; 
(5) Respondents and frequency of collection; and (6) Reporting and/or 
Recordkeeping burden. OMB invites public comment.
    The Department of Education is especially interested in public 
comment addressing the following issues: (1) Is this collection 
necessary to the proper functions of the Department; (2) will this 
information be processed and used in a timely manner; (3) is the 
estimate of burden accurate; (4) how might the Department enhance the 
quality, utility, and clarity of the information to be collected; and 
(5) how might the Department minimize the burden of this collection on 
the respondents, including through the use of information technology.

    Dated: April 3, 2007.
Angela C. Arrington,
IC Clearance Official Regulatory Information Management Services Office 
of Management.

Institute of Education Sciences

    Type of Review: New.
    Title: An Investigation of the Impact of a Traits-Based Writing 
Model on Student Achievement.
    Frequency: Semi-Annually; three times per year.
    Affected Public: State, Local, or Tribal Gov't, SEAs or LEAs; 
Individuals or household.
    Reporting and Recordkeeping Hour Burden:
     Responses: 3,392.
     Burden Hours: 7,072.
    Abstract: This study is designed to test the effectiveness of an 
analytical trait-based model for teaching and assessing student 
writing, called 6+1 Trait(r) Writing, by examining its impact on the 
writing achievement of 5th graders. The model is designed to improve 
student writing through an integrated approach to teaching and 
assessing writing skills, and it incorporates ten instructional 
strategies to develop the specific traits of writing.
    Requests for copies of the proposed information collection request 
may be accessed from http://edicsweb.ed.gov, by selecting the ``Browse 

Pending Collections'' link and by clicking on link number 3299. When 
you access the information collection, click on ``Download 
Attachments'' to view. Written requests for information should be 
addressed to U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Potomac Center, 9th Floor, Washington, DC 20202-4700. Requests may also 
be electronically mailed to ICDocketMgr@ed.gov or faxed to 202-245-
6623. Please specify the complete title of the information collection 
when making your request.
    Comments regarding burden and/or the collection activity 
requirements should be electronically mailed to ICDocketMgr@ed.gov. 
Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD) may 
call the Federal Information Relay Service (FIRS) at 1-800-877-8339.

[FR Doc. E7-6617 Filed 4-6-07; 8:45 am]

BILLING CODE 4000-01-P
