
    NEW AGRICULTURE TECHNOLOGY TO YIELD CLEANER WATER
                                                                 

                                            Release No. 0085.98
                                                               
                                    Tom Amontree (202) 720-4623
                                          tom.amontree@usda.gov
                                   Roger Salazar (202) 720-4623
                                         roger.salazar@usda.gov


NEW AGRICULTURE TECHNOLOGY TO YIELD CLEANER WATER

     WASHINGTON, Feb. 19, 1998--Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman today
announced a new technology developed by USDA scientists that has significant
implications for cleaner water.  

     This technology modifies the traditional corn plant. When used as feed
for pigs and chickens, the amount of phosphorous in the animals' waste is
cut in half.  

     "This is great news for those of us who want to reduce the amount of
nutrients running into our waters. And, it saves farmers money, too,"
Glickman said.

     Excess phosphorus in manure has been identified as a serious pollutant
in bodies of water from coast to coast.  It has also been suspected as one
possible culprit in the outbreaks of fish-killing algae found in the
Chesapeake Bay's tributaries. 

     Rain and other runoff can carry phosphorus-containing soil to nearby
lakes and streams.  There, algae thrive on the phosphorus, using up the
water's oxygen and hurting other aquatic life. 

     "USDA is making this technology widely available to maximize its
environmental benefits and boost farm income. This is one example of the
president's focus on science to help us solve some of America's most
pressing challenges," Glickman said.

     In addition, the phosphorous in this corn is readily absorbed by
animals, reducing the need for costly dietary supplements -- and saving
money for farmers.  Corn, soybeans and other common feedstuffs have plenty
of phosphorus.  But animals with one stomach -- pigs, poultry and even
people -- can't absorb phosphorus from plant foods.  This results in both
nutritional and environmental problems.  Corn with this new trait will
enable one-stomached animals to extract the grain's phosphorus -- meeting
their nutritional needs and causing the animals to excrete less of the
nutrient. 

                                #
