
   COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, ET AL., PETITIONERS V. EQUAL
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND LIEUTENANT OTTO J. BINKER

   No. 87-958

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1987

   On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of
Appeals for the Third Circuit

   Brief for the Federal Respondent in Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-10a) is reported
at 829 F.2d 392.  The opinion of the district court (Pet. App. 36a) is
reported at 645 F. Supp. 1545.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 37a) was entered on
September 21, 1987.  A petition for rehearing was denied on October
19, 1987 (Pet. App. 39a).  The petition for a writ of certiorari was
filed on December 11, 1987.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked
under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether petitioners established that a mandatory retirement age of
sixty for state police officers is "a bona fide occupational
qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation" of the
Pennsylvania State Police, within the meaning of Section 4(f)(1) of
the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, 29 U.S.C. (& Supp.
III) 623(f)(1).

                               STATEMENT

   1. Under Pennsylvania law, all state police troopers with 20 years
of service must retire at age sixty (Pa. Stat. Ann. tit. 71, Section
65(d) (Purdon Supp. 1987)).  In 1983, the Equal Employment Oppotunity
Commission (EEOC), on behalf of all persons adversely affected by that
mandatory retirement law, and Lieutenant Otto J. Binker of the
Pennsylvania State Police (PSP), on his own behalf, brought separate
actions (subsequently consolidated) in the United States District
Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania challenging the validity
of the law under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), 29 U.S.C. (&Supp. III) 621 et seq. Section 4(a)(1) of the ADEA
makes it unlawful for an employer "to discharge any individual * * *
because of such individual's age" (29 U.S.C. 623(a)(1)).

   Following a trial, the district court denied relief on the ground
that the Commonwealth's mandatory retirement age for state police
officers does not violate the ADEA.  See 596 F. Supp. 1333 (M.D. Pa.
1984).  The court agreed with petitioners that the mandatory
retirement age falls outside the scope of the ADEA's ban on age
discrimination because it is a "bona fide occupational qualification"
(BFOQ), within the meaning of Section 4(f)(1) of the ADEA (29 U.S.C.
(&Supp. III) 623(f)(1)), which exempts "reasonably necessary" BFOQs
from that ban.  See 596 F. Supp. at 1336-1348.

   2. The court of appeals vacated the district court's decision and
remanded for reconsideration in light of this Court's intervening
decisions in Johnson v. Mayor of Baltimore, 472 U.S. 353 (1985) and
Western Air Lines, Inc. v. Criswell, 472 U.S. 400 (1985).  See 768
F.2d 514 (3d Cir. 1985).  In Johnson and Criswell, this Court endorsed
a two-part inquiry that requires an employer relying on a BFOQ defense
to make a "particularized, factual showing" that, first, "the job
qualifications * * * (are) reasonably necessary to the essence of his
business" and, second, "the employer is compelled to rely on age as a
proxy for the * * * job qualifications validated in the first inquiry"
(see 472 U.S. at 362;  472 U.S. at 413, 414 (citation and emphasis
omitted)).  The court of appeals concluded that remand was warranted
because the district court had apparently assumed that good health and
physical strength are job qualifications reasonably necessary to the
essence of the PSP's operations and had not made the required
particularlized factual findings (see Pet. App. 4a).

   3. On remand, the district court again concluded (Pet. App.
11a-36a) that petitioners had not violated the ADEA because the
Commonwealth's mandatory retirement age for state police officers is a
BFOQ.  The court found (id. at 15a) that "(g)ood health and physical
fitness, strength, and dexterity are job qualifications reasonably
necessary to the essence of the State Police business" (see id. at
15a-21a, 27a-31a).  The court also found (id. at 21a) that petitioners
"are compelled to rely on the mandatory retirement of officers at age
60 as a proxy for individual testing of older officers for the
presence of the good health, physical fitness, strength and dexterity
required to perform the job of a state police officer" (see id. at
21a-27a, 31a-35a).

   4. The court of appeals reversed (Pet. App. 1a-10a).  The court
concluded that the district court's finding that good health, physical
fitness, strength, and dexterity are job qualifications reasonably
necessary to the essence of the operation of the state police is
clearly erroneous.  According to the court of appeals (id. at 8a),
"(t)he factual findings supporting the district court's treatment of
the first prong of the BFOQ defense do not include the determination
that the department in fact presently requires all state troopers to
maintain a minimum level of health and fitness.  Nor would the record
support such a finding." "Before a characteristic can be a reasonably
necessary BFOQ," the court held (id. at 9a), "it must be a trait that
the employer at least attempts to require of employees of all ages."
Hence, the court concluded (id. at 8a), "(u)ntil minimum standards are
developed, implemented and enforced, the PSP cannot justify its
mandatory retirement law by relying on good health and physical
conditioning as BFOQs reasonably necessary to PSP business." The court
stressed (id. at 9a) that the record in this case suggests that most
of the younger officers did not possess the purported BFOQs.

                               ARGUMENT

   The decision of the court of appeals, holding that the district
court clearly erred in finding that the first prong of the Criswell
test had been met, is both correct and highly fact-specific.  Although
it is inconsistent with the decision of another circuit, the
continuing importance of the conflict has been greatly diminished by
recent amendments to the ADEA, which prospectively exempt from Section
4(a)(1)'s ban on age discrimination state and local mandatory
retirement laws that apply to law enforcement officials.  Accordingly,
the petition should be denied.

   1. As the court of appeals explained (Pet. App. 9a), a trait can
justify a mandatory retirement age only if it is a trait that an
"employer at least attempts to require of employees of all ages." The
court of appeals noted (id. at 7a), however, that the Commonwealth has
"admitted that it presently has no mandatory minimum fitness
standards." The absence of any standards relating to fitness, health,
strength or dexterity -- whether enforced or not -- was supported in
the record not only by petitioners' admission, but by the failure of
the district court to indicate what minimum level of particular traits
is necessary to the performance of state trooper duties (ibid.), and
by suggestions in the record that most of the younger officers do not
possess the purported BFOQs (id. at 9a).  /1/ In addition to the fact
that no such standards or requirements were even in existence, the
court commented on the absence of any implementation or enforcement
program, especially with regard to fitness (id. at 8a-9a).  The court
of appeals further made clear its view that the ADEA "does not require
perfect monitoring and maintenance of a particular qualification at
all age levels" (id. at 6a).  Contrary to petitioners' claim (Pet.
12), the court cannot fairly be said to have held that the first prong
of Criswell is satisfied only where minimum standards of health and
fitness are developed, implemented, and enforced, through "regular
testing," and "sanctions and eventual dismissal of nonqualifying
employees."

   Hence, it was the total absence in the record of either a
"particularized factual showing" or any evidence to support a finding
that petitioners had in effect any requirements relating to the health
and fitness of employees, that properly prompted the court of appeals
to reject petitioners' BFOQ defense.  See Johnson v. Mayor of
Baltimore, 472 U.S. at 362.  The decision of the court of appeals is
therefore both fact-specific and represents a reasonable construction
of this Court's decisions.  /2/

   2. While there is some basis -- because of the fact-specific
character of the court of appeals' holding -- on which to contend that
no square circuit conflict exists, substantial inconsistency exists
between the decision of the court below and the decision of the First
Circuit in EEOC v. City of East Providence, 798 F.2d 524 (1986).  /3/
The First Circuit's decision focuses primarily on the dispensability
of fitness testing (798 F.2d at 530) to the legality of a mandatory
retirement program, and in that respect differs in emphasis from the
instant case.  However, it also appears to have involved a program,
like that involved here, where no identifiable fitness and health
standards had been formulated.  That the program was upheld in City of
East Providence notwithstanding that fact places the decision in
conflict with the instant case.

   3. Any dispute between the court of appeals in this case and the
First Circuit is of little continuing importance, however.  In 1986,
after City of East Providence had been decided, Congress amended the
ADEA to allow, in effect, a state and local government to apply
prospectively the very type of mandatory retirement law at issue in
this case pending the results of a congressionally-mandated study.
Section 3(a)(i) of the Age Discrimination in Employment Amendments of
1986, Pub. L. No. 99-592, 100 Stat. 3342, provides that it is not
unlawful for state or local government "to discharge any individual
because of such individual's age if such action is taken -- (1) with
respect to the employment of an individual as a firefighter or as a
law enforcement officer and the individual has attained the age of
hiring or retirement in effect under applicable State or local law on
March 3, 1983, and -- (2) pursuant to a bona fide * * * retirement
plan that is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of (the ADEA)" (to
be codified at 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) 623(i)).

   This amendment, which became effective on January 1, 1987, and
remains in effect through 1993, /4/ does not apply to actions, such as
this one, which were brought under the ADEA before its effective date
(see Pub. L. No. 99-592, Section 7(b), 100 Stat. 3345 (to be codified
at 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) 621 note )).  In confining the continuing
significance of the question presented in this case to those few suits
for retrospective relief that were brought against state and local
governments before January 1, 1987, the amendment renders the circuit
conflict a matter of little continuing importance.  /5/

   The 1986 amendments also require that the EEOC and Secretary of
Labor study whether physical and mental tests can validly measure the
ability of law enforcement officers and firefighters to perform their
jobs, and to report the results of that study, along with
recommendations regarding specific standards that such tests should
satisfy, to Congress within four years.  See Pub. L. No. 99-592,
Section 5(a) and (b), 100 Stat. 3343.  The EEOC is instructed to
propose guidelines within five years "for the administration and use
of physical and mental fitness tests to firefighters to perform the
requirements of their jobs" (Section 5(c), 100 Stat. 3343).  Congress,
therefore, has itself determined that, if valid, tests of physical and
mental fitness should be used and administered in the law enforcement
area when the current exemption from the age discrimination ban is
lifted.

   Notwithstanding the conflict in the courts of appeals, therefore,
the decision below does not warrant futher review.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General Department of Justice Washington, D.C. 20530
      (202) 633-2217

   CHARLES A. SHANOR

      General Counsel Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
      Washington, D.C. 20507

   FEBRUARY 1988

   /1/ Contrary to petitioners' suggestion (Pet. 11 n.7), the evidence
in the record does not support, and the district court did not
specifically find, either that "younger employees * * * are capable
of" performing the tasks from which the Commonwealth deduced the type
of fitness skills required for a state police officer, or that
petitioners assign to "limited duty status" all officers with "medical
deficiencies" that render them unable to perform the duties of a state
trooper.  With regard to the latter, the district court found (Pet.
App. 20a-21a) only that there was some "limited monitoring of the
health and fitness" of state police officers and a "limited duty
status program" for "temporarily disabled" officers.  As the court of
appeals found (id. at 8a (emphasis in original)), "(t)he district
court's findings primarily concern the health of (state police)
officers, not their fitness levels" and the district court made no
finding that the troopers must maintain a minimum level of health and
fitness.

   /2/ Criswell involved a mandatory retirement age used as a proxy
for the increased tendency to "possess traits of a physiological,
psychological or other nature which preclude safe and efficient job
performance" by a flight engineer (see 472 U.S. at 407-408).  In
affirming a judgment for the plaintiffs, the Court did not fault the
jury instructions for failing to require that the employer prove the
existence of basic standards requiring that all flight engineers be
free of such traits.  The jury instructions may have lacked such a
requirement in part because the employer sought to justify its
practice on the ground that there was no effective way to test for the
risk of sudden heart attack or other events imperiling passenger
safety, let alone to articulate a basic minimum standard (see 472 U.S.
at 406).  In this respect, that case differs from this one, where at
least some aspects of the qualities of fitness, strength, and
dexterity can be stated in terms of minimum requirements.  In any
event, this Court's omission in Criswell to fault the lower courts for
failing to require the existence, where feasible, of generally
applicable minimum standards, does not necessarily indicate approval
of that practice, since the judgment was against the employer.

   /3/ The court of appeals was explicit in "reject(ing) the analysis
in EEOC v. City of East Providence" (Pet. App. 9a).  The First Circuit
in City of East Providence, on the other hand, noted (798 F.2d at 530)
that the "city's acceptance of low physical standards, coupled with
other facts, might persuade a district court that physical fitness was
not deemed a necessary job qualification by that police force."

   The decisions of the Third Circuit in this case and of the Eighth
Circuit in EEOC v. Missouri State Highway Patrol, 748 F.wd 447 (1984),
cert. denied, 474 U.S. 828 (1985), are distinguishable in a more
fundamental respect.  The Eighth Circuit's discussion of the legal
relevance of physical examinations and fitness programs, which it
discounts, is confined to the second prong of the BFOQ analysis (see
748 F.2d at 453-454).  The Third Circuit's ruling in this case,
however, is concerned exclusively with the first prong.  The Eighth
Circuit's firstprong analysis, moreover, subjected the job
qualifications at issue only to the most cursory scrutiny (see id. at
451) and, for that reason, would seem plainly contrary to this Court's
subsequent decision in Criswell, which concluded that a "rational
basis" scrutiny was not adequate under either prong (see 472 U.S. at
418-420 & n.30, 421-423).

   Contrary to petitioners' claim (Pet. 14), the decision of the court
of appeals does not conflict with the Fifth Circuit's decision in EEOC
v. University of Texas Health Science Center, 710 F.2d 1091 (1983).
The court of appeals in this case has not disputed the Fifth Circuit's
ruling in University of Texas that "the ability of individuals to
perform effectively can * * * be balanced against the need to fill
vacancies" (710 F.2d at 1096).  In that case, however, unlike this
case, the question presented was whether the state employer could
relax its fitness requirements by raising its mandatory retirement age
ceiling without defeating its claim that fitness requirements were
necessary.  This case presents the distinct question, not raised in
University of Texas, whether an employer has met the threshold
requirement of establishing that fitness and other standards even
exist for employees other than those of retirement age.

   /4/ The amendment will cease to be effective on December 31, 1993,
unless reenacted.  See Pub. L. No. 99-592, Section 3(b), 100 Stat.
3342 (to be codified at 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) 623 & note)).

   /5/ The 1986 amendment applies with regard to state and local
mandatory retirement laws pertaining to firefighters and law
enforcement officers, but not to private employees of similar
occupations, as to whom cases raising comparable BFOQ issues are rare.
