--------------------------------------------------------------
CBB Seminar
Monday, October 16
8th Floor Conference Room

The Amish Genealogy Database and Applications to Disease Gene Hunting

Alejandro A. Schaffer


Hunting for disease genes in closed, inbred populations has been 
fruitful for a long time because these populations harbor rare 
recessive alleles. More recently, many researchers are using closed 
populations to study multigenic traits, hoping that it will require 
fewer factors to explain the trait variance in these special 
populations. To hunt genes for study familial diseases it is very 
useful to have accurate genealogies. One inbred population that has 
extensive genealogies is the Amish, but the information is spread over 
multiple sources that contain some errors. In 1996, we undertook a 
project to make a computer searchable version of the standard Amish 
genealogy book "Fisher Family History". The project was  extended to 
include two other large, complementary genealogy sources including both 
Amish and Mennonites. Our current database, AGDB version 3.0, includes 
approximately 295,000 individuals. We designed a software system, 
PedHunter to answer genealogical queries that arise in disease gene 
hunts; PedHunter is being used by other groups who constructed their 
own genealogies of other populations.  We have used AGDB and PedHunter 
to assist in hunting genes for: McKusick-Kaufman syndrome, Amish 
nemaline myopathy, and Amish microcephaly. Another research group is 
using PedHunter/AGDB to hunt genes for diabetes and hypertension. 
Instances of combinatorial algorithms problems, which are well-known to 
algorithmicists but unknown to geneticists, arise in the course of 
using the genealogy to construct disease pedigrees, and in the 
subsequent genetic linkage analysis.

Includes joint work with many people, primarily Richa Agarwala, Leslie 
Biesecker, and James Tomlin



