June 8, 2003

Don Savage (202) 358-1727
NASA Headquarters, Washington D.C.


Guy Webster (321) 354-6278
JPL 


George Diller (321) 867-2468 
Kennedy Space Center, Florida 


Teresa Martini (626) 205-4508 
LEGO Company
RELEASE: 2003-081

GIRL WITH DREAMS NAMES MARS ROVERS 'SPIRIT' AND 'OPPORTUNITY'

Twin robotic geologists NASA is sending to Mars will embody in their 
newly chosen names -- Spirit and Opportunity -- two cherished 
attributes that guide humans to explore. 

NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe and 9-year-old Sofi Collis, who wrote 
the winning essay in a naming contest, unveiled the names this 
morning at NASA's Kennedy Space Center. "Now, thanks to Sofi Collis, 
our third grade explorer-to-be from Scottsdale, Ariz., we have names 
for the rovers that are extremely worthy of the bold mission they are 
about to undertake," O'Keefe said. 

Sofi read her essay: "I used to live in an orphanage. It was dark and 
cold and lonely. At night, I looked up at the sparkly sky and felt 
better. I dreamed I could fly there. In America, I can make all my 
dreams come true. Thank you for the 'Spirit' and the 'Opportunity.'" 

Hers was selected from nearly 10,000 entries in the contest sponsored 
by NASA and the Lego Co., a Denmark-based toymaker, with 
collaboration from the Planetary Society, Pasadena, Calif.. 

Collis was born in Siberia. At age two, she was adopted by Laurie 
Collis and brought to the United States. "She has in her heritage and 
upbringing the soul of two great spacefaring countries," O'Keefe 
said. "One of NASA's goals is to inspire the next generation of 
explorers. Sofi is a wonderful example of how that next generation 
also inspires us." 

Collis' dream of flying now takes the form of wanting to become an 
astronaut. Meanwhile, she enjoys playing with her older sister, 
swimming, reading Harry Potter stories, and her family's three dogs 
and one cat. 

Lego President Kjeld Kirk Kristiansen, commenting on the naming 
contest, said, "The early days of space exploration stimulated the 
creativity of an entire generation, expanded our imagination and 
encouraged us to push our limits, making us better and braver human 
beings. With this project, the Lego Co. wants to bring part of that 
magic back. Everything we do is aimed at giving children that same 
power to create, and by involving children in the Name the Rovers 
Contest and other related playful learning activities, we hope to 
motivate and inspire the next generation of explorers." 

Eleven miles from today's naming ceremony, Spirit, formerly called 
Mars Exploration Rover A, waited for a launch opportunity on Monday 
at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Opportunity, the second twin in 
what is still named the Mars Exploration Rover project, is being 
prepared for its first launch opportunity on June 25. 

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., manages the Mars 
Exploration Rover project for the NASA Office of Space Science, 
Washington, D.C. JPL is a division of the California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena. 

Information about the rovers and the scientific instruments they carry 
is available online from JPL at http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/mer and from 
Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y., at http://athena.cornell.edu. 
Information about the naming contest is available at 
http://www.nametherovers.org. 

	
-end-
