HC010HSU.TXT File 

This file contains information and sample SAS programs to create a permanent
SAS dataset, for users who want to use SAS in processing the MEPS data
provided in this PUF release.

There are two ways to create a permanent SAS dataset, using either the SAS
transport data file or the ASCII data file supplied in this PUF release. 
Section A provides a sample SAS program for the first alternative, which is to
convert the SAS transport data file to a regular SAS dataset, using the SAS
PROCedure: XCOPY.  Section B provides a sample SAS program for the second
alternative, which is to read data from the ASCII data file, using a SAS DATA
step with INFILE, INPUT, and LABEL statements.  Section C explains
format-related SAS statements that a user may optionally use when working with
the SAS dataset.  Examples of SAS programs (DATA step or PROC) are provided in
all three sections, primarily for the benefit of inexperienced users.  Section
D contains complete SAS statements that must be used in the programs described
in Sections B and C.

******************************************************************************

The sample SAS programs provided in Sections A and B show how to create a
permanent SAS dataset from the data files provided in this PUF release.  The
examples use File 1 of this MEPS PUF release and can be easily modified for
use with File 2.

A.     A Sample SAS Program for Converting the SAS Transport File to a
Permanent SAS Dataset 

The SAS transport file HC10HF1.SSP was created from a PC-SAS Version 6.12 data
file, using PROC COPY.  This file has been tested for use with PC-SAS version
6.10 or higher, or with mainframe SAS version 6.08 or higher.  This file may
work with earlier versions of SAS, although it has not been tested with those
versions. Users who are unable to use this SAS Transport file should instead
convert the ASCII data file HC10HF1.DAT to a SAS data set as described in
Section B.   

The SAS PROCedure XCOPY will read a SAS transport data file and convert the
data to regular SAS format, storing the output in a permanent SAS dataset. 
This permanent SAS dataset can then be used for all future processing and
analyses.

Below is a sample PC-SAS program that can be used to convert the SAS transport
file to a permanent PC SAS dataset (in a Windows environment, with SAS V6.12). 
 
     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     FILENAME IN1 'C:\MEPS\HC10HF1.SSP';

     PROC XCOPY IN=IN1 OUT=PUFLIB IMPORT;
     RUN;

If the user wants a list of variables and a few sample records in the
permanent SAS dataset, following are the SAS statements to accomplish these.

     PROC CONTENTS DATA=PUFLIB.HC10HF1;
     TITLE "List of Variables in MEPS HC10HF1 SAS Dataset";
     RUN;

     PROC PRINT DATA=PUFLIB.HC10HF1 (OBS=20);
     TITLE "First 20 Observations in MEPS HC10HF1 SAS Dataset";
     RUN;

The LIBNAME statement tells SAS the location (directory name) to store the
permanent SAS dataset which is output by PROC XCOPY.  The FILENAME statement
tells SAS the location (complete directory and file name) of the input SAS
transport data file. 

NOTES:

     1)  The names used in the LIBNAME and FILENAME statements shown
     above (i.e., PUFLIB, IN1) are arbitrary; they are only temporary
     aliases.

     2)  The directory and file names used in the LIBNAME and FILENAME
     statements shown above are Windows syntax and may need to be
     modified for other operating systems such as UNIX, MAC/OS, VMS, or
     OS/2.

     3)  HC10HF1 is the internal SAS dataset name (also the PC file name,
     without the extension) prior to the creation of the SAS transport data
     file.  After running PROC XCOPY, the output SAS dataset assumes the same
     dataset name (or file name).  Hence, in the example above, a file named
     HC10HF1.SD2 will be created under the C:\MEPS directory when PROC
     XCOPY runs successfully.



B.     A Sample SAS Program for Converting the ASCII Data File to a Permanent
SAS Dataset

The complete SAS statements (INPUT and LABEL) included in Section D are
intended to save time for those users wishing to create a permanent SAS
dataset from the HC10HF1.DAT ASCII data  file.  These statements must be used
in combination with other SAS statements to create the appropriate SAS
program, as shown below.  To use the statements provided in Section D to
create a SAS program, you will need an ASCII text editor.  If you are using an
interactive form of SAS (Windows, UNIX, OS2, etc.), use the editor provided as
part of the SAS software.  

Following is a sample SAS program that will convert the ASCII data file to SAS
format.

     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     FILENAME IN1 'C:\MEPS\HC10HF1.DAT';

     DATA PUFLIB.HC10HF1;
     INFILE IN1 LRECL=329;
     INPUT .....; * to user: insert the complete INPUT statement that is
provided in Section D;
     LABEL .....; * to user: insert the complete LABEL statement that is
provided in Section D;
     RUN;

Here is an explanation of the SAS statements used in the program above.

LIBNAME statement: This tells SAS the location (directory name) of the
permanent SAS dataset.

FILENAME statement: This tells SAS the location of the input ASCII data file.

DATA statement: This signifies the beginning of a SAS DATA step and specifies
describes the output SAS dataset, referencing the LIBNAME entry (PUFLIB) and
assigning an internal SAS dataset name (HC10HF1).  In the example, after the
successful completion of the DATA step, a PC file named HC10HF1.SD2 would have
been created in the C:\MEPS directory.

INFILE statement: This tells SAS the location (directory and file name) of the
input ASCII data file.  Also provided is the logical record length (329
bytes), with the default of RECFM=V implied when this parameter is omitted. 
LRECL and RECFM are optional parameters in the INFILE statement.  With regard
to these options, please note the following: the ASCII data file HC10HF1.DAT
contains a 2-byte carriage return/line feed at the end of each record.  When
converting to a PC-SAS file, the LRECL option should be used to specify the
record length to avoid use of a default record length by PC-SAS.  If the
RECFM=V option is used, the LRECL option must be specified as the logical
record length (e.g., 329 for HC10HF1.DAT).  If RECFM=F is used, then the LRECL
value must  be specified as the logical record length plus 2 (331 for
HC10HF1.DAT).  Note that if the RECFM option is omitted, then the default
option of RECFM=V is automatically used, and LRECL should be specified as the
logical record (329 for HC10HF1.DAT).

INPUT statement: This specifies the input record layout, giving names and the
beginning and ending column positions for data items (which become SAS
variables) in the ASCII data file (HC10HF1.DAT).  Variable type (numeric or
character) is also defined via the INPUT statement.

LABEL statement: This associates descriptive names with the SAS variables.

RUN statement: This tells SAS to execute all commands up to this point.


C.     Optional Format-related SAS Statements

If a user wants to use formats for the SAS variables, a SAS format library
must first be created.  Below is a SAS program that will accomplish this.

     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     
     PROC FORMAT LIBRARY=PUFLIB;
     VALUE .....; * to user: insert the complete set of VALUE statements found
in Section D;
     VALUE .....;
     .......... ;
     RUN;


Below is an example of how to use the SAS formats defined by the PROC FORMAT
procedure.

     LIBNAME PUFLIB 'C:\MEPS';
     OPTIONS FMTSEARCH=(PUFLIB); 
   
     PROC FREQ DATA=PUFLIB.HC10HF1;
     TABLES .... / LIST MISSING;
     FORMAT varnam1 fmtnam1.  Varnam2 fmtnam2.  .... ;
     * to user: substitute varnami and fmtnami with actual variable names and
format names;
     *     Insert the FORMAT statement provided in Section D, if you are using
all the variables;
     *     in the TABLES statement;
     TITLE "Frequency Distributions ....";
     RUN; 

Here is an explanation of the SAS statements used above.

LIBNAME statement: This tells SAS the location (directory name) of the SAS
format library.  Please note that SAS datasets (file name extension is 'SD2')
and format libraries (file name extension is 'SC2') can be stored under the
same directory.

OPTIONS FMTSEARCH=...: This specifies the SAS format library.

PROC FORMAT statement: This identifies the SAS procedure that will make SAS
formats according to VALUE statements.  Formats will be stored in a file named
FORMATS.SC2.  Please note that the option 'LIBRARY=...' can be omitted, if the
user does not want to create a permanent SAS format library.  When simply
'PROC FORMAT;' is used, the formats are defined only for the duration of the
batch SAS program or an interactive SAS session.

VALUE statement: This gives a) names to formats; and b) descriptive labels for
individual values, or range of values.  The format names can then be invoked
using a FORMAT statement, if desired.

PROC FREQ statement: This identifies the SAS procedure that will generate
frequency distributions of variables specified in the TABLES statement,
formatted if a FORMAT statement is used.  The input SAS dataset is specified
in the 'DATA=' option.

FORMAT statement: This associates existing formats with variables.  When using
this statement, the formats must have already been created with a PROC FORMAT
procedure. 

RUN statement: This tells SAS to execute all commands up to this point.


NOTES:

     1)  Use of formats is entirely optional, and depends on the type
     of analyses that you are doing.  It is recommended that you create
     and use them as appropriate.

     2)  The names used in the LIBNAME and FILENAME statements shown
     above (i.e., PUFLIB, IN1) are arbitrary; they are only temporary
     aliases.

     3)  You only create the permanent SAS data set once.  Additional
     analyses can be run using this permanent dataset.

     4)  The file and directory specifications in the LIBNAME and
     FILENAME statements are Windows syntax and may need to be modified
     for other operating systems such as UNIX, MAC/OS, VMS, or OS/2.


D.  SAS Statements

This section contains SAS INPUT, LABEL, and FORMAT statements for use in
converting the ASCII HC10HF1.DAT file and HC10HF2.DAT into SAS data sets, and
VALUE statements for creating a SAS format library.   




*INPUT, LABEL AND FORMAT STATEMENTS FOR HC10HF1;

* INPUT STATEMENT;
INPUT @1      DUID      5.0
      @6      PID       2.0
      @8      DUPERSID $8.0
      @16     EVNTIDX  $12.0
      @28     EVENTRN   1.0
      @29     FFID11X  $11.0
      @40     HHBEGYR   4.0
      @44     HHBEGMM   2.0
      @46     SELFAGEN  2.0
      @48     HHTYPE    1.0
      @49     CNA       2.0
      @51     COMPANN   2.0
      @53     DIETICN   2.0
      @55     HHAIDE    2.0
      @57     HOSPICE   2.0
      @59     HMEMAKER  2.0
      @61     IVTHP     2.0
      @63     MEDLDOC   2.0
      @65     NURPRACT  2.0
      @67     NURAIDE   2.0
      @69     OCCUPTHP  2.0
      @71     PERSONAL  2.0
      @73     PHYSLTHP  2.0
      @75     RESPTHP   2.0
      @77     SOCIALW   2.0
      @79     SPEECTHP  2.0
      @81     OTHRHCW   2.0
      @83     NONSKILL  2.0
      @85     SKILLED   2.0
      @87     SKILLWOS $25.0
      @112    OTHCW     2.0
      @114    OTHCWOS  $25.0
      @139    HOSPITAL  2.0
      @141    VSTRELCN  2.0
      @143    TREATMT   2.0
      @145    MEDEQUIP  2.0
      @147    DAILYACT  2.0
      @149    COMPANY   2.0
      @151    OTHSVCE   2.0
      @153    OTHSVCOS $25.0
      @178    FREQCY    2.0
      @180    DAYSPWK   2.0
      @182    DAYSPMO   2.0
      @184    HOWOFTEN  2.0
      @186    TMSPDAY   2.0
      @188    HRSLONG   2.0
      @190    MINLONG   2.0
      @192    SAMESVCE  2.0
      @194    HHDAYS    2.0
      @196    NUMCOND   2.0
      @198    FFHHTYPX  2.0
      @200    FFHH96    2.0
      @202    FFTOT96   2.0
      @204    FFBEF96   2.0
      @206    FFHH97    2.0
      @208    FFTOT97   2.0
      @210    HHSF96X   7.2
      @217    HHMR96X   7.2
      @224    HHMD96X   7.2
      @231    HHPV96X   7.2
      @238    HHVA96X   7.2
      @245    HHCH96X   5.2
      @250    HHOF96X   7.2
      @257    HHSL96X   7.2
      @264    HHWC96X   4.2
      @268    HHOR96X   7.2
      @275    HHOU96X   6.2
      @281    HHOT96X   4.2
      @285    HHXP96X   7.2
      @292    HHTC96X   8.2
      @300    IMPHHSLF  1.0
      @301    IMPHHMCR  1.0
      @302    IMPHHMCD  1.0
      @303    IMPHHPRV  1.0
      @304    IMPHHVA   1.0
      @305    IMPHHCHM  1.0
      @306    IMPHHOFD  1.0
      @307    IMPHHSTL  1.0
      @308    IMPHHWCP  1.0
      @309    IMPHHOPR  1.0
      @310    IMPHHOPU  1.0
      @311    IMPHHOTH  1.0
      @312    IMPHHCHG  1.0
      @313    WTDPER96  12.6
      @325    VARPSU96  2.0
      @327    VARSTR96  3.0
;


* FORMAT STATEMENT;
FORMAT DUID     DUID.
       PID      PID.
       DUPERSID $DUPERSI.
       EVNTIDX  $EVNTIDX.
       EVENTRN  EVENTRN.
       FFID11X  $FFID11X.
       HHBEGYR  HHBEGYR.
       HHBEGMM  HHBEGMM.
       SELFAGEN SELFAGEN.
       HHTYPE   HHTYPE.
       CNA      CNA.
       COMPANN  COMPANN.
       DIETICN  DIETICN.
       HHAIDE   HHAIDE.
       HOSPICE  HOSPICE.
       HMEMAKER HMEMAKER.
       IVTHP    IVTHP.
       MEDLDOC  MEDLDOC.
       NURPRACT NURPRACT.
       NURAIDE  NURAIDE.
       OCCUPTHP OCCUPTHP.
       PERSONAL PERSONAL.
       PHYSLTHP PHYSLTHP.
       RESPTHP  RESPTHP.
       SOCIALW  SOCIALW.
       SPEECTHP SPEECTHP.
       OTHRHCW  OTHRHCW.
       NONSKILL NONSKILL.
       SKILLED  SKILLED.
       SKILLWOS $SKILLWO.
       OTHCW    OTHCW.
       OTHCWOS  $OTHCWOS.
       HOSPITAL HOSPITAL.
       VSTRELCN VSTRELCN.
       TREATMT  TREATMT.
       MEDEQUIP MEDEQUIP.
       DAILYACT DAILYACT.
       COMPANY  COMPANY.
       OTHSVCE  OTHSVCE.
       OTHSVCOS $OTHSVCO.
       FREQCY   FREQCY.
       DAYSPWK  DAYSPWK.
       DAYSPMO  DAYSPMO.
       HOWOFTEN HOWOFTEN.
       TMSPDAY  TMSPDAY.
       HRSLONG  HRSLONG.
       MINLONG  MINLONG.
       SAMESVCE SAMESVCE.
       HHDAYS   HHDAYS.
       NUMCOND  NUMCOND.
       FFHHTYPX HHFFTYPE.
       FFHH96   FFHH9F.
       FFTOT96  FFTOT9F.
       FFBEF96  FFBEF9F.
       FFHH97   FFHH9G.
       FFTOT97  FFTOT9G.
       HHSF96X  HHSF96X.
       HHMR96X  HHMR96X.
       HHMD96X  HHMD96X.
       HHPV96X  HHPV96X.
       HHVA96X  HHVA96X.
       HHCH96X  HHCH96X.
       HHOF96X  HHOF96X.
       HHSL96X  HHSL96X.
       HHWC96X  HHWC96X.
       HHOR96X  HHOR96X.
       HHOU96X  HHOU96X.
       HHOT96X  HHOT96X.
       HHXP96X  HHXP96X.
       HHTC96X  HHTC96X.
       IMPHHSLF IMPHHSLF.
       IMPHHMCR IMPHHMCR.
       IMPHHMCD IMPHHMCD.
       IMPHHPRV IMPHHPRV.
       IMPHHVA  IMPHHVA.
       IMPHHCHM IMPHHCHM.
       IMPHHOFD IMPHHOFD.
       IMPHHSTL IMPHHSTL.
       IMPHHWCP IMPHHWCP.
       IMPHHOPR IMPHHOPR.
       IMPHHOPU IMPHHOPU.
       IMPHHOTH IMPHHOTH.
       IMPHHCHG IMPHHCHG.
       WTDPER96 WTDPER9F.
       VARPSU96 VARPSU9F.
       VARSTR96 VARSTR9F.
;


* LABEL STATEMENT;
LABEL DUID    ='DWELLING UNIT ID'
      PID     ='PERSON NUMBER'
      DUPERSID='PERSON ID (DUID+PID)'
      EVNTIDX ='EVENT ID'
      EVENTRN ='EVENT ROUND NUMBER'
      FFID11X ='FLAT FEE ID'
      HHBEGYR ='EVENT START DATE - YEAR'
      HHBEGMM ='EVENT START DATE - MONTH'
      SELFAGEN='DOES PROVIDER WORK FOR AGENCY OR SELF'
      HHTYPE  ='HOME HEALTH EVENT TYPE'
      CNA     ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - CERT NURSE ASST'
      COMPANN ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - COMPANION'
      DIETICN ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - DIETITIAN/NUTRT'
      HHAIDE  ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - HOME CARE AIDE'
      HOSPICE ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - HOSPICE WORKER'
      HMEMAKER='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - HOMEMAKER'
      IVTHP   ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - IV THERAPIST'
      MEDLDOC ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - MEDICAL DOCTOR'
      NURPRACT='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - NURSE/PRACTR'
      NURAIDE ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - NURSES AIDE'
      OCCUPTHP='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - OCCUP THERAP'
      PERSONAL='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - PERS CARE ATTDT'
      PHYSLTHP='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - PHYSICL THERAPY'
      RESPTHP ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - RESPIRA THERAPY'
      SOCIALW ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - SOCIAL WORKER'
      SPEECTHP='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - SPEECH THERAPY'
      OTHRHCW ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - OTHER'
      NONSKILL='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - NON-SKILLED'
      SKILLED ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - SKILLED'
      SKILLWOS='SPECIFY TYPE OF SKILLED WORKER'
      OTHCW   ='TYPE OF HLTH CARE WRKR - SOME OTHER'
      OTHCWOS ='SPECIFY OTHER TYPE HEALTH CARE WORKER'
      HOSPITAL='ANY HH CARE SVCE DUE TO HOSPITALIZATION'
      VSTRELCN='ANY HH CARE SVCE RELATED TO HLTH COND'
      TREATMT ='PERSON RECECIVED MDICAL TREATMENT'
      MEDEQUIP='PERSON WAS TAUGHT USE OF MED EQUIPMT'
      DAILYACT='PERSON WAS HELPED WI DAILY ACTIVITIES'
      COMPANY ='PERSON RECEIVED COMPANIONSHIP SERVICES'
      OTHSVCE ='PERSON RECEIVED OTH HOME CARE SERVICES'
      OTHSVCOS='SPECIFY OTHER HOME CARE SRVCE RECEIVED'
      FREQCY  ='PROVIDER HELPED EVERY WK/SOME WKS'
      DAYSPWK ='# DAYS PER WEEK PROVIDER CAME (HA ONLY)'
      DAYSPMO ='# DAYS PER MONTH PROVIDER CAME (HA ONLY)'
      HOWOFTEN='PROV CAME ONCE PER DAY/MORE THAN ONCE'
      TMSPDAY ='TIMES/DAY PROVIDER CAME HOME TO HELP'
      HRSLONG ='HOURS EACH VISIT LASTED'
      MINLONG ='MINUTES EACH VISIT LASTED'
      SAMESVCE='ANY OTH MONS PER RECEIVED SAME SERVICES'
      HHDAYS  ='DAYS PER MONTH IN HOME HEALTH, 1996'
      NUMCOND ='TOTAL #COND RECORDS LINKED TO THIS EVENT'
      FFHHTYPX='ED FLAT FEE STEM-LEAF INDICATOR'
      FFHH96  ='TOTAL #HH EVENTS IN FF - 1996'
      FFTOT96 ='#VISITS IN FLAT FEE (ALL EVENTS) - 1996'
      FFBEF96 ='#VISITS IN FF (ALL EVENTS) BEFORE 1996'
      FFHH97  ='#HH EVENTS IN FLAT FEE: RD3, 1997'
      FFTOT97 ='#VISITS IN FF (ALL EVENTS) -1997 THRU R3'
      HHSF96X ='AMOUNT PAID,FAMILY (IMPUTED)'
      HHMR96X ='AMOUNT PAID,MEDICARE(IMPUTED)'
      HHMD96X ='AMOUNT PAID,MEDICAID (IMPUTED)'
      HHPV96X ='AMOUNT PAID,PRIVATE INSURANCE (IMPUTED)'
      HHVA96X ='AMOUNT PAID,VETERANS(IMPUTED)'
      HHCH96X ='AMOUNT PAID,CHAMPUS/CHAMPVA (IMPUTED)'
      HHOF96X ='AMOUNT PAID,OTHER FEDERAL (IMPUTED)'
      HHSL96X ='AMOUNT PAID,STATE & LOCAL GOV (IMPUTED)'
      HHWC96X ='AMOUNT PAID,WORKERS CHHP (IMPUTED)'
      HHOR96X ='AMOUNT PAID,OTHER PRIVATE (IMPUTED)'
      HHOU96X ='AMOUNT PAID,OTHER PUBLIC (IMPUTED)'
      HHOT96X ='AMOUNT PAID,OTHER INSURANCE (IMPUTED)'
      HHXP96X ='SUM OF HHSF96X-HHOT96X (IMPUTED)'
      HHTC96X ='HHLD REPORTED TOTAL CHARGE (IMPUTED)'
      IMPHHSLF='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHSF96X'
      IMPHHMCR='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHMR96X'
      IMPHHMCD='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHMD96X'
      IMPHHPRV='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHPV96X'
      IMPHHVA ='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHVA96X'
      IMPHHCHM='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHCH96X'
      IMPHHOFD='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHOF96X'
      IMPHHSTL='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHSL96X'
      IMPHHWCP='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHWC96X'
      IMPHHOPR='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHOR96X'
      IMPHHOPU='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHOU96X'
      IMPHHOTH='IMPUTATION FLAG FOR HHOT96X'
      IMPHHCHG='IMPUTATION STATUS OF HHTC96X'
      WTDPER96='POVERTY/MORTALITY ADJUSTED PERS LEVL WGT'
      VARPSU96='VARIANCE ESTIMATION PSU 1996'
      VARSTR96='VARIANCE ESTIMATION STRATUM 1996'
;

*INPUT, LABEL AND FORMAT STATEMENTS FOR HC10HF2;
* INPUT STATEMENT;
INPUT @1      DUID      5.0
      @6      PID       2.0
      @8      DUPERSID $8.0
      @16     EVNTIDX  $12.0
      @28     HHSFFIDX $10.0
      @38     HHSF96H   7.2
      @45     HHMR96H   7.2
      @52     HHMD96H   7.2
      @59     HHPV96H   7.2
      @66     HHVA96H   6.2
      @72     HHCH96H   5.2
      @77     HHOF96H   6.2
      @83     HHSL96H   7.2
      @90     HHWC96H   5.2
      @95     HHOT96H   5.2
      @100    HHUC96H   5.2
      @105    HHTC96H   8.2
      @113    WTDPER96  12.6
      @125    VARPSU96  2.0
      @127    VARSTR96  3.0
;


* FORMAT STATEMENT;
FORMAT DUID     DUID.
       PID      PID.
       DUPERSID $DUPERSI.
       EVNTIDX  $EVNTIDX.
       HHSFFIDX $HHSFFIX.
       HHSF96H  HHSF96H.
       HHMR96H  HHMR96H.
       HHMD96H  HHMD96H.
       HHPV96H  HHPV96H.
       HHVA96H  HHVA96H.
       HHCH96H  HHCH96H.
       HHOF96H  HHOF96H.
       HHSL96H  HHSL96H.
       HHWC96H  HHWC96H.
       HHOT96H  HHOT96H.
       HHUC96H  HHUC96H.
       HHTC96H  HHTC96H.
       WTDPER96 WTDPER9F.
       VARPSU96 VARPSU9F.
       VARSTR96 VARSTR9F.
;


* LABEL STATEMENT;
LABEL DUID    ='DWELLING UNIT ID'
      PID     ='PERSON NUMBER'
      DUPERSID='PERSON ID (DUID+PID)'
      EVNTIDX ='EVENT ID'
      HHSFFIDX='HOUSEHOLD REPORTED FLAT FEE ID'
      HHSF96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, FAMILY (PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHMR96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, MEDICARE(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHMD96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, MEDICAID(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHPV96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, PRIV INS(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHVA96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, VETERANS(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHCH96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD,CHMP/CHMPVA(PRE-IMPUTD)'
      HHOF96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, OTHER FED(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHSL96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, STATE&LOC(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHWC96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, WORK COMP(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHOT96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD, OTH INSUR(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHUC96H ='HHLD RPTD AMT PD,UNCOL LIAB(PRE-IMPUTED)'
      HHTC96H ='HHLD REPORTED TOTAL CHARGE (PRE-IMPUTED)'
      WTDPER96='POVERTY/MORTALITY ADJUSTED PERS LEVL WGT'
      VARPSU96='VARIANCE ESTIMATION PSU 1996'
      VARSTR96='VARIANCE ESTIMATION STRATUM 1996'
;

*VALUE STATEMENTS TO CREATE A FORMAT LIBRARY;

VALUE CNA
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE COMPANN
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE COMPANY
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES, AT LEAST ONCE'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE DAILYACT
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES, AT LEAST ONCE'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE DAYSPMO
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 - 31 = '1 - 31 NUMBER OF DAYS PER MONTH'
    ;

  VALUE DAYSPWK
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 - 7 = '1 - 7 NUMBER OF DAYS PER WEEK'
    ;
  VALUE DIETICN
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;

  VALUE DUID
  13-10562='VALID ID';

  VALUE $DUPERSI
  "00013019"-"10562028"="VALID ID";

  VALUE $EVNTIDX
    '000130190064' - '105620280051' = 'VALID ID'
    ;

  VALUE EVENTN
    10 - 2591 = '10 - 2591'
    ;

  VALUE EVENTRN
    1 = '1 ROUND 1'
    2 = '2 ROUND 2'
    3 = '3 ROUND 3'
    ;
 
  VALUE FFBEF9F
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0 NO FLAT FEE VISITS PRIOR TO 1996'
     8 = '8 # OF VISITS PRIOR TO 1996'
    ;
 
   VALUE FFHH9F
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    1 - 8 = '1 - 8 EVENTS'
    ;
  VALUE FFHH9G
       -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
        0 = '0'
    1 - 3 = '1 - 3 EVENTS'
    ;
 

 VALUE $FFID11X
   '-1'='-1 INAPPLICABLE'
"0296302101"-"0993901901"="VALID ID";

  VALUE $HHSFFIX
   '-1'='-1 INAPPLICABLE'
"0194502501"-"0993901901"="VALID ID";

  VALUE FFTOT9F
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
     2 - 13 = '2 - 13 EVENTS'
    ;
  VALUE FFTOT9G
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
     1 - 4 = '1 - 4 EVENTS'
    ;
 
  VALUE FREQCY
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 EVERY WEEK'
    2 = '2 SOME WEEKS'
    3 = '3 ONLY CAME ONCE'
    ;
  VALUE HHAIDE
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
 
  VALUE HHBEGMM
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 - 12 = '1 - 12 MONTH'
    ;
  VALUE HHBEGYR
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1996 = '1996'
    ;
  VALUE HHDAYS
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
     0 = '0'
     1 - 31 = '1 - 31 DAYS'
    ;

  VALUE HHFFTYPE
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 FLAT FEE STEM'
    2 = '2 FLAT FEE LEAF'
    ;

  VALUE HHSF96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    3.07-40 ='$3.08 - $40.00'
    40<-80='$40.01 - $80.00'
    80<-460='$80.01 - $460.00'
    460<-3000='$460.01 - $3000.00'
   ;
  VALUE HHMR96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    20-300='$20.00 - $300.00'
    300<-723.38='$300.01 - $723.38'
    723.38<-1480.87='$723.39 - $1480.87'
    1480.87<-7184.44='$1480.88 - $7184.44'
   ;
  VALUE HHMD96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    11.5-139.2='$11.50 - $139.20'
    139.20<-516.84='$139.21 - $516.84'
    516.84<-1348.80='$516.85 - $1348.80'
    1348.80<-5417.64='$1348.81 - $5417.64'
   ;
  VALUE HHPV96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    4.59-70='$4.60 - $70.00'
    70< - 261.76='$70.01 - $261.76'
    261.76< - 445='$261.77 - $445.00'
    445< -6611.13='$445.01 - $6611.13'
    ;
  VALUE HHVA96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    16-187.5='$16.00 - $187.50'
    187.50<-534.80='$187.51 - $534.80'
    534.80<-939.12='$534.81 - $939.12'
    939.12<-7184.44='$939.13 - $7184.44'
   ;

  VALUE HHCH96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    22.70-22.72='$22.71 - $22.72'
     ;
  VALUE HHOF96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    18.45-47.78='$18.46 - $47.78'
    47.78<-187.50='$47.79 - $187.50'
    187.50<-500.65='$187.51 - $500.65'
    500.65<-2820.40='$500.66 - $2820.40'
   ;
  VALUE HHSL96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    22-135.5='$22.00 - $135.50'
    135.50<-265.32='$135.51 - $265.32'
    265.32<-549.99='$265.33 - $549.99'
    549.99<-1439.34='$550.00 - $1439.34'
   ;

  VALUE HHWC96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    ;
  VALUE HHOR96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    86.67-210='$86.67 - $210.00'
    210< - 767.50='$210.01 - $767.50'
    767.50<-1050='$767.51 - $1050.00'
    1050< - 1100='$1050.01 - $1100.00'
    ;
  VALUE HHOU96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    9-11='$9.00 - $11.00'
    11<-27.65='$11.01 - $27.65'
    27.65<-249.30='$27.66 - $249.30'
    249.30<-623.25='$249.31 - $623.25'
    ;

  VALUE HHOT96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    ;
  VALUE HHXP96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    5-172='$5.00 - $172.00'
    172<-600.84='$172.01 - $600.84'
    600.84<-1324.87='$600.85 - $1324.87'
    1324.87<-7184.44='$1324.88 - $7184.44'
    ;
  VALUE HHTC96X
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    5-232.32='$5.00 - $232.32'
    232.32<-749.15='$232.33 - $749.15'
    749.15<-1600  ='$749.16 - $1600.00'
    1600<-17897.82='$1600.01 - 17897.82'
   ;

  VALUE HHCH96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    ;
  VALUE HHMD96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    9-5417.64= '$9.00 - $5417.64'
   ;
  VALUE HHMR96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    32-7184.44= '$32.00 - $7184.44'
   ;
  VALUE HHOF96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    92-184= '$92.00 - $184.00'
   ;
  VALUE HHOT96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
   ;
  VALUE HHPV96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    4.60-6611.13= '$4.60 - $6611.13'
   ;
  VALUE HHSF96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    3.08-3000= '$3.08 - $3000.00'
   ;
  VALUE HHSL96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    22-1439.34= '$22.00 - $1439.34'
   ;
  VALUE HHTC96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    5-17897.82= '$5.00 - 17897.82'
   ;
  VALUE HHUC96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
   ;
  VALUE HHVA96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    200-200= '$200.00 - $200.00'
   ;
  VALUE HHWC96H
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
   ;

  VALUE HHTYPE
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 FRIEND/NEIGHBOR'
    2 = '2 RELATIVE'
    3 = '3 VOLUNTEER'
    4 = '4 OTHER - PAID'
    5 = '5 VOLUNTEERED: MEAL SERVICE DELIVERY'
    ;

  VALUE HMEMAKER
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE HOSPICE
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE HOSPITAL
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE HOWOFTEN
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 ONCE PER DAY'
    2 = '2 MORE THAN ONCE PER DAY'
    3 = '3 24 HOURS PER DAY'
    ;
  VALUE HRSLONG
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
     1 - 24 = '1 - 24 HOURS VISIT LASTED'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHCHG
    . = 'MISSING'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHCHM
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
     1 = '1 IMPUTED'
     . = 'MISSING'
    ;

  VALUE IMPHHMCD
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHMCR
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHOFD
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHOTH
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHOPR
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHOPU
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHPRV
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHSLF
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHSTL
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHVA
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IMPHHWCP
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    0 = '0 UNIMPUTED'
    1 = '1 IMPUTED'
    . = 'MISSING'
    ;
  VALUE IVTHP
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE MEDEQUIP
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES, AT LEAST ONCE'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE MEDLDOC
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE MINLONG
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0'
    1 - 50 = '1 - 50 MINUTES VISIT LASTED'
    ;

  VALUE NONSKILL
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE NUMCOND
       0 = '0'
     1-4 = '1 - 4 CONDS LINKED'
    5-23 = '5 - 23 CONDS LINKED'
    ;
  VALUE NURAIDE
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE NURPRACT
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE OCCUPTHP
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
 
  VALUE OTHCW
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE OTHRHCW
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE OTHSVCE
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES, AT LEAST ONCE'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;

  VALUE $OTHCWOS
    '-9' = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    'BRINGS HEALTH SUPPLIES'='BRINGS HEALTH SUPPLIES'
    'BY MAIL AIR FILTERS'   ='BY MAIL AIR FILTERS'
    'EQUIPMENT TECHNICAN'   ='EQUIPMENT TECHNICAN'
    'PRIVATE COMPANION'     ='PRIVATE COMPANION'
    'PSYCHIATRIST'          ='PSYCHIATRIST'
    'TECHNICIAN'            ='TECHNICIAN'
   ;
  VALUE $OTHSVCO
    '-9' = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    '-1' = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    '1'  = '1'
    'ADVICE ABOUT BREASTFEEDIN'  ='ADVICE ABOUT BREASTFEEDIN'
    'ASSISTS WITH DIALYSIS'      ='ASSISTS WITH DIALYSIS'
    'BATHING, DRESSING'          ='BATHING, DRESSING'
    'BATHING, DRESSING, FEEDIN'  ='BATHING, DRESSING, FEEDIN'
    'BLD SUGR, INSLN INJXNS'     ='BLD SUGR, INSLN INJXNS'
    'BLIND ASSOCIATION'          ='BLIND ASSOCIATION'
    'BLOOD SUGAR, INSLN INJXN'   ='BLOOD SUGAR, INSLN INJXN'
    'BLOOD WORK'                 ='BLOOD WORK'
    'BRING OXYGEN TANK'          ='BRING OXYGEN TANK'
    'CARE OF BABY'               ='CARE OF BABY'
    'CARE OF NEW BABY'           ='CARE OF NEW BABY'
    'CARING FOR NEWBORN'         ='CARING FOR NEWBORN'
    'CASE MGR, CKS ON R EACH M'  ='CASE MGR, CKS ON R EACH M'
    'CHANGING COLOSTYME'         ='CHANGING COLOSTYME'
    'CHILD CARE'                 ='CHILD CARE'
    'CLEAN HOUSE'                ='CLEAN HOUSE'
    'CLEANING WOUND& BANDAGE'    ='CLEANING WOUND& BANDAGE'
    'COMATOSE TREATMENT'         ='COMATOSE TREATMENT'
    'COOKING'                    ='COOKING'
    'CUTS GRASS, REPAIRS LOCKS'  ='CUTS GRASS, REPAIRS LOCKS'
    'DAILY ACTIVITIES'           ='DAILY ACTIVITIES'
    'DAY CARE'                   ='DAY CARE'
    'DISPENSE MEDICATIONS'       ='DISPENSE MEDICATIONS'
    'DRAW BLOOD'                 ='DRAW BLOOD'
    'DRAWING BLOOD EVERY 3 WKS'  ='DRAWING BLOOD EVERY 3 WKS'
    'DRAWS BLOOD'                ='DRAWS BLOOD'
    'DRESSED SURGERY'            ='DRESSED SURGERY'
    'DRESSING WOUND'             ='DRESSING WOUND'
    'DRIVES ME AROUND'           ='DRIVES ME AROUND'
    'DRIVING,FOOD PREPARATION'   ='DRIVING,FOOD PREPARATION'
    'EDUCATIONAL'                ='EDUCATIONAL'
    'EVERYTHING'                 ='EVERYTHING'
    'FED HER MEALS, DRIVING, H'  ='FED HER MEALS, DRIVING, H'
    'GAVE ALLERGY SHOT'          ='GAVE ALLERGY SHOT'
    'GIVES MEDICATION SOMETIME'  ='GIVES MEDICATION SOMETIME'
    'HOME COMMUNIAN'             ='HOME COMMUNIAN'
    'HOUSEWORK'                  ='HOUSEWORK'
    'INFO ON FOODS TO EAT'       ='INFO ON FOODS TO EAT'
    'INJECTIONS'                 ='INJECTIONS'
    'MASSAGE THERAPY'            ='MASSAGE THERAPY'
    'MEDS, INSULIN INJXNS, BS '  ='MEDS, INSULIN INJXNS, BS'
    'PARAMEDIC TOOK RES TO HOS'  ='PARAMEDIC TOOK RES TO HOS'
    'PARAMEDIC TOOK RESP TO HO'  ='PARAMEDIC TOOK RESP TO HO'
    'PEDICURE'                   ='PEDICURE'
    'PERSONALL CARE'             ='PERSONALL CARE'
    'PHYSICAL THERAPY'           ='PHYSICAL THERAPY'
    'PODIATRY CARE'              ='PODIATRY CARE'
    'RELIGIOUS SERVICES'         ='RELIGIOUS SERVICES'
    'SHOPPING, INSERT BATTERIE'  ='SHOPPING, INSERT BATTERIE'
    'TAKING CARE OF KIDS'        ='TAKING CARE OF KIDS'
    'TAUGHT STRENGTHING R HAND'  ='TAUGHT STRENGTHING R HAND'
    'TOOK BLOOD PRESSURE'        ='TOOK BLOOD PRESSURE'
    'WEIGHING AND MEASURING'     ='WEIGHING AND MEASURING'
   ;
  VALUE $PERSID
    '10035010' - '20592020' = 'VALID ID'
    ;

  VALUE PERSONAL
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE PHYSLTHP
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE $PID
    '010' - '093' = '010 - 093'
    ;
  VALUE PID
    10 - 93 = '10 - 93'
    ;
  VALUE $PROVID
    '100351A0012' - '205926A0055' = 'VALID ID'
    ;
  VALUE PROVN
    12 - 319='12 - 319'
    ;

  VALUE RESPTHP
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE $RU
    '0' = '0 NON-RESPONSE'
    'A' = 'A FAMILY LETTER = A'
    'B' = 'B FAMILY LETTER = B'
    'C' = 'C FAMILY LETTER = C'
    'D' = 'D FAMILY LETTER = D'
    'E' = 'E FAMILY LETTER = E'
    ;

  VALUE $RUNTID
    '100351A' - '205926A' = 'VALID ID'
    ;
  VALUE SAMESVCE
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     1 = '1 YES'
     2 = '2 NO'
   ;
  VALUE SELFAGEN
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 WORK FOR AGENCY, HOSP, NURS HOME'
    2 = '2 WORK FOR SELF'
    ;
  VALUE SKILLED
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE $SKILLWO
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    'BILIRUBIN LAMP TECHNICIAN' ='BILIRUBIN LAMP TECHNICIAN'
    'BLOOD DRAW'                ='BLOOD DRAW'
    'BROUGHT OXYGEN TANK'       ='BROUGHT OXYGEN TANK'
    'CHILD COORDINATOR'         ='CHILD COORDINATOR'
    'COMPUTER (MONITOR)'        ='COMPUTER (MONITOR)'
    'COUNSELING'                ='COUNSELING'
    'EMT AMBBULATORY SERVICE'   ='EMT AMBBULATORY SERVICE'
    'HIRISK CASE MANAGER BILIN' ='HIRISK CASE MANAGER BILIN'
    'HIRISK CASE MANAGER-BILIN' ='HIRISK CASE MANAGER-BILIN'
    'LAB TECHNICIAN'            ='LAB TECHNICIAN'
    'MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELOR'   ='MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELOR'
    'PT AND OXYGEN ATTENDANT'   ='PT AND OXYGEN ATTENDANT'
    'RESIDENT PODIATRIST'       ='RESIDENT PODIATRIST'
    'TECHNICIAN'                ='TECHNICIAN'
    'THERAPIST'                 ='THERAPIST'
    'WORKS FOR DR.'         ='WORKS FOR DR.'
   ;
  VALUE SOCIALW
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE SPEECTHP
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE TMSPDAY
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 - 15 = '1 - 15 NUMBER OF TIMES PER DAY'
    ;
  VALUE TREATMT
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES, AT LEAST ONCE'
    2 = '2 NO'
    ;
  VALUE VAPLACE
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
     0 = '0 NO'
     2 = '2 NO'
     1 = '1 YES'
   ;
  VALUE VARPSU9F
     0 = '0'
     1  - 43 = '1-43'
    ;
  VALUE VARSTR9F
      0 ='0'
      1  - 140 = '1-140'
    ;
  VALUE VSTRELCN
    -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
    -8 = '-8 DK'
    -7 = '-7 REFUSED'
    -1 = '-1 INAPPLICABLE'
    1 = '1 YES'
    2 = '2 NO'
   ;
  VALUE WTDPER9F
     0 ='0'
     1692.382491  - 53098.254784 = '1692.382491  - 53098.254784'
    ;
  VALUE      $ICD9COD
          '-8'='-8 DK'
           -9 = '-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
          '-1'='-1 INAPPLICABLE'
   "001"-"139"=" 001-139"
   "140"-"239"=" 140-239"
   "240"-"279"=" 240-279"
   "280"-"289"=" 280-289"
   "290"-"319"=" 290-319"
   "320"-"389"=" 320-389"
   "390"-"459"=" 390-459"
   "460"-"519"=" 460-519"
   "520"-"579"=" 520-579"
   "580"-"629"=" 580-629"
   "630"-"677"=" 630-677"
   "680"-"709"=" 680-709"
   "710"-"739"=" 710-739"
   "740"-"759"=" 740-759"
   "760"-"779"=" 760-779"
   "780"-"799"=" 780-799"
   "800"-"999"=" 800-999"
   "V00"-"V99"=" V00-V99"
   ;

   VALUE  $ICD9PRO
        '-8'='-8 DK'
        '-9'='-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
        '-1'='-1 INAPPLICABLE'
   "01"-"05"=" 01-05"
   "06"-"07"=" 06-07"
   "08"-"16"=" 08-16"
   "18"-"20"=" 18-20"
   "21"-"29"=" 21-29"
   "30"-"34"=" 30-34"
   "35"-"39"=" 35-39"
   "40"-"41"=" 40-41"
   "42"-"54"=" 42-54"
   "55"-"59"=" 55-59"
   "60"-"64"=" 60-64"
   "65"-"71"=" 65-71"
   "72"-"75"=" 72-75"
   "76"-"84"=" 76-84"
   "85"-"86"=" 85-86"
   "87"-"99"=" 87-99"
  ;

   VALUE $CCCODEX
          '-9'='-9 NOT ASCERTAINED'
          '-8'='-8 DK'
          '-7'='-7 REFUSED'
          '-1'='-1 INAPPLICABLE'
   '001'-'260'=' 001-260'
  ;

