March 24, 2008

Steve Cole
Headquarters, Washington
202-358-0918
stephen.e.cole@nasa.gov 

Amy Hartley
Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks
907-474-5823
amy.hartley@gi.alaska.edu 

MEDIA ADVISORY: M08-063

NASA TO HOST MEDIA DAY DURING ARCTIC AIRBORNE CAMPAIGN IN ALASKA

WASHINGTON - NASA will host a media day in Fairbanks, Alaska, on 
Monday, April 14, to provide reporters with a behind-the-scenes view 
of the largest airborne experiment ever conducted to study the impact 
of air pollution on the Arctic's atmospheric chemistry and changing 
climate.

Three NASA research aircraft and more than 100 scientists will be 
based out of Fairbanks for three weeks in April to investigate the 
"arctic haze" of air pollution that forms from sources across the 
Northern Hemisphere. The experiment -- Arctic Research of the 
Composition of the Troposphere from Aircraft and Satellites (ARCTAS) 
-- will use aircraft and NASA satellites to probe the arctic 
atmosphere, sampling pollution particles and gases to understand 
their origins and how they influence climate across the region.

The media day begins at 10 a.m. AKDT at the Geophysical Institute at 
the University of Alaska Fairbanks, 903 Koyukuk Dr. After a briefing 
with mission scientists, reporters will be given tours of the 
research aircraft and opportunities for interviews. Representatives 
from the Department of Energy and the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration also will be available to discuss two 
complementary airborne campaigns based in Fairbanks in April.

Reporters planning to attend the media day should contact Amy Hartley 
at 907-474-5823 by April 13.

For more information about ARCTAS, visit: 

http://www.espo.nasa.gov/arctas 

	
-end-
