
   AMY TRAVEL SERVICES, INC., ET AL., PETITIONERS V. FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION

   No. 89-283

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1989

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Seventh Circuit

   Brief For The Respondent in Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Questions Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals, Pet. App. 118, Exh. 3, is
reported at 875 F.2d 564.  The district court's findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and final order, Pet. App. 1-117, are unreported.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on April 19, 1989.
 The petition for a writ of certiorari was originally filed on July
17, 1989.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C.
1254(1).

                          QUESTIONS PRESENTED

   1. Whether Section 13(b) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, 15
U.S.C. 53(b), which expressly authorizes a court to issue "a permanent
injunction," implicitly forbids a court from awarding other ancillary
equitable relief.

   2. Whether the district court erred in holding the individual
petitioners liable for the unlawful conduct of the corporations they
owned and controlled where they had knowledge of the violations,
participated in them, and failed to bring them to a halt.

   3. Whether the district court erroneously excluded testimony that
the individual petitioners relied on the advice of counsel.

                               STATEMENT

   The United States District Court for the Northern District of
Illinois found that petitioners deceived consumers in violation of
Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act), 15 U.S.C. 45.
 The court issued a permanent injunction forbidding petitioners from
committing further violations of the FTC Act and ordered petitioners
to pay $6,629,100 in restitution to consumers.  Pet. App. 1-117.  The
court of appeals affirmed.

   1. Petitioners are the corporations Amy Travel Service, Inc. (Amy),
Resort Performance, Inc., and Resort Telemarketing, Inc., and the
individuals Thomas P. McCann (McCann) and James F. Weiland (Weiland).

   In 1985, petitioners McCann and Weiland formed a business to sell
travel certificates, also known as "vacation passports." Each passport
consisted of two pages of written material and described vacation
packages to nine different resort locations, including Acapulco,
Jamaica, Hawaii, and London, among others.  The passport stated that
it "entitle(d) the adult holder(s) to receive two round-trip air
tickets plus lodging for 8 days and 7 nights for the price not to
exceed one unrestricted round-trip, standard, all-year, full-economy
(Y-class) airfare." Petitioners sold their passports to consumers for
$289 to $329.  Pet. App. 10, 13-18, Exh. 3, at 2, 3-4 (emphasis
omitted).

   In 1986, McCann and Weiland opened a "telemarketing" office to sell
vacation passports by telephone directly to consumers.  McCann and
Weiland eventually opened eight additional telephone sales rooms.  All
of these offices were managed by McCann and Weiland, and all were
operated as a single entity in all material respects.  Pet. App.
10-12, Exh. 3, at 2-3.

   To promote telephone sales, petitioners McCann and Weiland
developed scripts to be used by their sales agents.  The basic script
falsely represented that the offer was being made to only a few
special customers and suggested that the consumer was required to
"qualify," a hurdle that was easily surmounted by answering yes to a
few simple questions.  That script then told the consumer that he or
she was being offered a "special vacation voucher to Hawaii for only
$329.90." Later on, that script indicated that the price of the
voucher entitled the consumer to a fully paid vacation for eight days
and seven nights, plus two round-trip airfares, at a cost not to
exceed one "unrestricted round-trip (Y-class) full economy airfare."
By design, the script did not disclose the cost of the Y-class airfare
and, therefore, concealed the total cost of the vacation.  Pet. App.
18-22, Exh. 3, at 4-7 (emphasis omitted).  /1/

   Petitioners' marketing practices misled consumers about the true
cost of the vacation package.  Many consumers reasonably believed that
the cost of the entire package was the $289-$329 cost of the passport,
which they also understood to be the price of one unrestricted economy
airfare.  Even consumers who recognized that there was an additional
charge -- up to the cost of a "full-economy (Y-class) airfare" -- were
misled into believing the trip was a bargain.  In fact, unbeknownst to
most consumers, the Y-class airfare, far from being an "economy" fare
as characterized by petitioners, is the highest priced coach airfare
available.  Pet. App. 72-73, Exh. 3 at 9.  Indeed, a Y-class airfare
often costs three or more times as much as other airfares and two to
five times as much as the passport.  Because petitioners concealed
this fact prior to purchase, it was not until most consumers had
actually purchased their passport and sought to book their flight and
accommodations that they learned the actual cost of their vacation and
realized how expensive it was in relation to other readily available
alternatives.  /2/ This concealed cost helps explain why, although
approximately 60,000 passports were sold, only 12,000 to 13,000 trips
were taken.  Petitioners' activities generated gross revenues of about
$1.5 million in 1986 and $4.5 million in 1987.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at
8.

   Petitioners were well aware from the inception of their scheme that
they were deceiving consumers.  Customer complaints about
misrepresentations began almost immediately.  In addition, large
numbers of consumers disputed the charges made to their accounts,
resulting in chargebacks to petitioners' bank accounts when consumers
refused to pay.  A number of banks terminated petitioners' accounts
because of these consumer complaints and chargebacks.  One bank
eventually suffered more than $700,000 in chargebacks.  Pet. App. 89,
91, Exh. 3, at 8-9.

   2. On August 3, 1987, the Federal Trade Commission (Commission)
filed a complaint, pursuant to Section 13(b) of the FTC Act, 15 U.S.C.
53(b), alleging that petitioners were engaged in unfair and deceptive
marketing practices in violation of Section 5 of that Act, 15 U.S.C.
45.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 10.

   After a one-week trial, the district court (by a designated
magistrate) found petitioners to have engaged in deceptive practices
by (1) misrepresenting and deceptively failing to disclose the full
cost of their vacations and (2) misrepresenting their billing
practices and billing consumers without authorization.  The court
entered an order permanently enjoining petitioners from engaging in
those practices, rescinding the outstanding, unused vacation
passports, and requiring restitution of $6,629,100, which represented
the amount of money petitioners collected from consumers for unused
passports.  The court held petitioners jointly and severally liable
for the restitution.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 11-12.  See Pet. App.
1-117.

   3. The court of appeals affirmed.  First, it rejected petitioners'
challenge to the authority of the district court to award monetary
equitable relief (i.e., rescission and restitution) ancillary to a
permanent injunction.  The court observed that "(a)ll other circuits
that have dealt with this issue have found that section 13(b) grants
the authority to issue other necessary equitable relief." Pet. App.
Exh. 3, at 13.  Relying on the decisions of those other circuits as
well as its own precedents, the court of appeals held that Section
13(b) authorized the award of ancillary equitable relief such as
rescission and restitution.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 12-14.

   The court of appeals also rejected petitioners' contention that the
magistrate erred by holding the individual petitioners jointly and
severally liable.  It found that the individual petitioners knew or
should have known of the unlawful practices perpetrated by the
corporations they managed and controlled, and either participated
directly in them or had the authority to stop them and failed to do
so.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 16-21.

   In addition, the court of appeals rejected petitioners' claim that
the magistrate erred by excluding certain evidence that they relied on
the advice of counsel.  According to the court, "(t)he magistrate
correctly found that the blessing of an attorney did not make the
telemarketing scripts truthful";  "counsel could not sanction
something that the (petitioners) should have known was wrong." Pet.
App. Exh. 3, at 21.  In the court's view, the record and the
magistrate's opinion demonstrated that "the magistrate was
sufficiently aware of (petitioners') efforts to get counsel's
approval" and did not err in excluding certain testimony as
irrelevant.  Id. at 21 n.8.  /3/

                               ARGUMENT

   1. Petitioners maintain that the district court lacked authority to
order restitution under Section 13(b) of the FTC Act, 15 U.S.C. 53(b).
 Pet. 10-55.  That Section provides that "in proper cases the
Commission may seek, and after proper proof, the court may issue, a
permanent injunction." Petitioners argue that by expressly authorizing
a permanent injunction, the statute impliedly forbids the award of any
other equitable relief, including the rescission and restitution
ordered in this case.  Pet. 16.  Petitioners' exclusion-by-implication
reasoning is contrary to this Court's decisions construing statutes
authorizing equitable remedies.

   a. It is well established that where Congress allows resort to
equity for enforcement of a statute, all the inherent equitable powers
of the district court are available for the proper and complete
exercise of the court's equitable jurisdiction, unless the statute
explicitly or by inescapable inference limits the scope of that
jurisdiction.  Renegotiation Board v. Bannercraft Co., 415 U.S. 1,
19-20 (1974);  Mitchell v. Robert DeMario Jewelry, Inc., 361 U.S. 288,
290-291 (1960);  Scripps-Howard Radio, Inc. v. FCC, 316 U.S. 4, 11
(1942).  As this Court stated in Porter v. Warner Holding Co., 328
U.S. 395 (1946):

      Unless otherwise provided by statute, all the inherent equitable
      powers of the District Court are available for the proper and
      complete exercise of that jurisdiction.  And since the public
      interest is involved in a proceeding of this nature, those
      equitable powers assume an even broader and more flexible
      character than when only a private controversy is at stake.  * *
      * (T)he court may go beyond the matters immediately underlying
      its equitable jurisdiction and decide whatever other issues and
      give whatever other relief may be necessary under the
      circumstances.  Only in that way can equity do complete rather
      than truncated justice.

         Moreover, the comprehensiveness of this equitable
      jurisdiction is not to be denied or limited in the absence of a
      clear and valid legislative command.  Unless a statute in so
      many words, or by a necessary and inescapable inference,
      restricts the court's jurisdiction in equity, the full scope of
      that jurisdiction is to be recognized and applied.  The great
      principles of equity, securing complete justice, should not be
      yielded to light inferences, or doubtful construction.

Id. at 398 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
Petitioners concede that Porter provides the applicable rule of
construction in this case.  Pet. 21-22.

   Section 13(b) expressly authorizes permanent injunctive relief and
neither expressly nor implicitly excludes the award of ancillary
equitable relief.  Consistent with this Court's decisions, every court
that has considered the question -- including three courts of appeals
-- has held that the district court is authorized to grant ancillary
equitable relief under Section 13(b).  FTC v. World Travel Vacation
Brokers, Inc., 861 F.2d 1020, 1026 (7th Cir. 1988);  FTC v. U.S. Oil &
Gas Corp., 748 F.2d 1431, 1433-1435 (11th Cir. 1984);  FTC v. H.N.
Singer, Inc., 668 F.2d 1107, 1110-1112 (9th Cir. 1982);  FTC v.
Atlantex Associates, 1987-2 Trade Cas. (CCH) Paragraph 67,788 at
59,253 (S.D. Fla. 1987), aff'd, 872 F.2d 966 (11th Cir. 1989);  In re
Evans Products Co., 1986-1 Trade Cas. (CCH) Paragraph 67,113 at
62,722-62,723 (S.D. Fla. 1986);  FTC v. International Diamond Corp.,
1983-2 Trade Cas. (CCH) Paragraph 65,506 at 68,457-68,458 (N.D. Cal.
1983);  FTC v. Virginia Homes Manufacturing Corp., 509 F. Supp. 51,
54-55 (D. Md.), aff'd, 661 F.2d 920 (4th Cir. 1981) (Table).  See FTC
v. Evans Products Co., 775 F.2d 1084, 1086 (9th Cir. 1985).

   In this case, the district court determined that "(t)his record
demonstrates a proper case for restitution to consumers who were
billed either without their knowledge or consent or with consent but
based on false representations made to them." Pet. App. 95.  The court
calculated the amount of restitution by adding the number of consumers
who requested refunds but did not receive them and the number of
consumers who purchased passports and requested vacations but did not
travel, and then multiplying this sum by the estimated average cost of
a vacation passport.  Id. at 108.  The district court's restitution
award is unquestionably fair.  As the court of appeals noted, the
magistrate "limit(ed) the relief to those customers who received
nothing of value for the price of the vacation passport.  Customers,
satisfied or unsatisfied, who took trips were excluded from the
computation of relief." Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 15 n.7.

   b. Petitioners' reading of Section 13(b) to exclude by implication
ancillary equitable relief contradicts the Porter principle.  For
example, petitioners emphasize that the statute authorizes only a
"permanent injunction." But their effort to characterize that language
as narrow, Pet. 22-26, simply disregards the relevant canon of
construction.  That language, like the language of other statutes
authorizing a particular equitable remedy, invokes the full equitable
jurisdiction of the district court.  See, e.g., CFTC v. Hunt, 591 F.2d
1211, 1223 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 442 U.S. 921 (1979);  FSLIC v.
Dixon, 835 F.2d 554, 560-563 (5th Cir. 1987);  ICC v. B & T
Transportation Co., 613 F.2d 1182, 1184-1186 (1st Cir. 1980);  SEC v.
Texas Gulf Sulphur Co., 446 F.2d 1301, 1307 (2d Cir.), cert. denied,
404 U.S. 1005 (1971).  For the same reason, petitioners' reliance on
minor variations in language is misplaced:  as long as the statute
authorizes an equitable remedy, as Section 13(b) clearly does, the
district court may exercise the full sweep of its equitable powers.
FSLIC v. Dixon, 835 F.2d at 561-562.  See Mitchell v. Robert DeMario
Jewelry, Inc., 361 U.S. at 289-293;  see also CFTC v. Hunt, 591 F.2d
at 1223.

   Nor do other provisions of the FTC Act imply that Congress intended
to bar the award of ancillary equitable relief, as petitioners claim.
Pet. 25-28.  Section 13(b), in addition to authorizing permanent
injunctions, provides that "(u)pon a proper showing * * * a temporary
restraining order or a preliminary injunction may be granted without
bond." 15 U.S.C. 53(b).  According to petitioners, the precise wording
of the provision authorizing a preliminary injunction implies that it
should be read narrowly.  Reading the provision authorizing a
preliminary injunction in pari materia with that authorizing a
permanent injunction, petitioners argue that the latter provision,
like the former, should be limited to its precise terms.  The flaw in
this logic, however, begins with the initial premise:  the language
authorizing preliminary injunctions is no narrower than that
authorizing permanent injunctions.  Indeed, courts have uniformly
construed the preliminary injunction provision to authorize the award
of the full range of equitable remedies.  See FTC v. Southwest
Sunsites, Inc., 665 F.2d 711, 717-722 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 456
U.S. 973 (1982);  see also FTC v. Elders Grain, Inc., 868 F.2d 901,
907 (7th Cir. 1989);  FTC v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 665 F.2d 1072 (D.C.
Cir. 1981).

   The language of Section 19 of the FTC Act, 15 U.S.C. 57b, similarly
fails to create the necessary inference that Section 13(b) is to be
limited to the precise relief there described.  Petitioners argue that
because Section 19(b), 15 U.S.C. 57b(b), explicitly authorizes
"rescission" and the "refund of money," the failure to list such
remedies in Section 13(b) evidences an intent to exclude such remedies
as ancillary to the award of a permanent injunction.  Contrary to
petitioners' assumption, however, Section 19(b) and Section 13(b) are
not simply alternative sources of remedies from which one could reason
that their explicit availability in the former section impliedly
excludes them in the latter section.  Section 19 empowers the
Commission to seek judicial redress on the basis of conclusive
findings of illegality made by the Commission in an administrative
adjudication.  In a permanent injunction action under Section 13(b),
by contrast, the court determines both liability and remedy.  That
Section 19 speaks with great specificity, while Section 13(b) does
not, is thus no reason to restrict the latter's scope -- the two
sections serve entirely different purposes.  Congress recognized this
difference and expressly disavowed petitioners' construction by means
of a "savings clause." Section 19(e), 15 U.S.C. 57b(e), specifies
that:

      Remedies provided in this section are in addition to, and not in
      lieu of, any other remedy or right of action provided by State
      or Federal law.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to
      affect any authority of the Commission under any other provision
      of law.

As the court of appeals in FTC v. H.N. Singer, Inc., 668 F.2d at 1113,
correctly observed, the savings clause rejects the inference that
Congress intended to restrict the equitable remedies provided by
Section 13(b) when it created the novel hybrid adjudication in Section
19.

   Petitioners' reliance on the legislative history of the permanent
injunction provision is similarly misplaced.  Pet. 28-33.  Courts have
consistently ruled that nothing in the legislative history rebuts the
presumption that ancillary equitable relief is available in a
permanent injunction action brought under Section 13(b).  E.g., FTC v.
H.N. Singer, Inc., 668 F.2d at 1110-1111;  FTC v. World Travel
Vacation Brokers, Inc., 861 F.2d at 1027-1028.  The only portion of
the legislative history of Section 13(b) that discusses the permanent
injunction provision (which is quoted in full in Singer, 668 F.2d at
1110-1111) provides several illustrative examples of situations in
which a permanent injunction would be "proper," including cases of
routine fraud.  If the legislative history shows anything, it makes
clear that Congress considered the permanent injunction remedy to be
proper in that class of cases -- ongoing routine fraud of the kind
involved here -- in which a preliminary injunction and monetary
equitable relief are particularly appropriate.  The legislative
history neither expressly nor by inescapable inference limits the
courts' equitable powers under Section 13(b).

   2. Contrary to petitioners' contention, Pet. 52-63, both the court
of appeals and the district court applied the correct legal standard
in holding the individual petitioners liable for restitution for
violations of the FTC Act committed by the corporations under their
control.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 19-21.  An individual, such as a
corporate officer or manager, is liable for restitution if he knew or
should have known of the corporation's misrepresentations and either
directly participated in them or possessed the authority to control
them and failed to do so.  See, e.g., FTC v. Atlantex Associates,
1987-2 Trade Cas. (CCH) Paragraph 67,788, at 59,254-59,255 (S.D. Fla.
1987), aff'd, 872 F.2d 966 (11th Cir. 1989);  FTC v. Kitco of Nevada,
Inc., 612 F. Supp. 1282, 1292-1293 (D. Minn. 1985);  FTC v.
International Diamond Corp., 1983-2 Trade Cas. (CCH) Paragraph 65,506
at 68,458 (N.D. Cal. 1983);  FTC v. H.N. Singer, Inc., 1982-1983 Trade
Cas. (CCH) Paragraph 65,011 at 70,619 (N.D. Cal. 1982).  /4/

   As their opinions amply demonstrate, both the court of appeals and
the district court properly applied this well-established principle in
assessing the liability of the individual petitioners.  Pet. App.
83-92, Exh. 3, at 17-19.  The record evidence established that McCann
and Weiland designed and supervised the telephone sales operation on a
day-to-day basis;  they wrote the deceptive scripts and therefore knew
of the material misrepresentations and omissions upon which the
scripts were based;  they were aware of the high volume of customer
complaints and the excessive chargebacks which resulted from the
deceptive scripts and the embellishing misrepresentations employed by
the telemarketers;  and by their own admission they had authority to
control the deceptive sales operation.  Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 19.  /5/
As both courts correctly observed:  "'(O)ne may not enjoy the benefits
of fraudulent activity and then insulate one's self from liability by
contending that one did not participate directly in the fraudulent
practices.'" Ibid.  Petitioners' fact-bound contention does not merit
further review.

   3. Petitioners assert that the magistrate erroneously excluded
certain testimony offered by petitioners to prove that they relied on
the advice of counsel.  That evidence was properly excluded as
cumulative and redundant.  According to the court of appeals:  "An
examination of the record and the trial court's opinion shows that the
magistrate was sufficiently aware of (petitioners') efforts to get
counsel's approval of corporate practices." Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 21
n.8.  In addition, exclusion of petitioner's additional
advice-of-counsel testimony did not prejudice petitioners.  Both the
magistrate and the court of appeals assumed that petitioners had
relied on the advice of counsel.  They determined, however, that
"reliance on advice of counsel was not a valid defense on the question
of knowledge;  counsel could not sanction something that the
(petitioners) should have known was wrong." Id. at 21.  Finally,
because petitioners present no argument or authority to support their
assertion, there is no reason to review the conclusion of the lower
courts that that testimony was properly excluded.  See Sup. Ct. R.
21.1(j), 21.5.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   JAY C. SHAFFER

      Acting General Counsel

   ERNEST J. ISENSTADT

      Assistant General Counsel

   MELVIN H. ORLANS

      Attorney Federal Trade Commission

   OCTOBER 1989

   /1/ Moreover, many of the sales scripts used by petitioners
deviated from the basic script described above and falsely represented
to the consumer that "you have been computer selected thru (sic) a
major credit card company to be offered a fully paid vacation to
Hawaii, for only $289.90." Pet. App. 23, Exh. 3, at 7 (emphasis
omitted).

   /2/ For example, the round-trip Y-class airfare from Washington,
D.C. to Honolulu on a particular date was $1,936 (not including the
approximately $300 cost of the passport).  At the same time, a full
vacation package for two to Waikiki, including accommodations for
seven nights and airfare, could be purchased from a legitimate travel
agent for $1,198.  Pet. App. 50-52, 70-73, 78-79, Exh. 3, at 9-10;
see Pet. App. 25-36.

   /3/ The court of appeals also rejected petitioners' contentions
that the magistrate erred in excluding certain evidence, Pet. App.
Exh. 3, at 14-16;  that an asset freeze prevented them from paying
attorney's fees, id. at 21-22;  and that the magistrate erred in
admitting consumer affidavits, id. at 22-24.  Petitioners do not seek
further review of those issues.

   /4/ Contrary to petitioners' contention, Pet. 58-61, the courts
clearly required the Commission "to establish the defendants had or
should have had knowledge or awareness of the misrepresentations."
Pet. App. Exh. 3, at 18.  However, the court of appeals properly
rejected petitioners' argument that the Commission must prove
subjective intent to defraud on the part of the individual defendants,
holding instead that:

      (the) knowledge requirement may be fulfilled by showing that the
      individual had "actual knowledge of material misrepresentations,
      reckless indifference to the truth or falsity of such
      misrepresentations, or an awareness of a high probability of
      fraud along with an intentional avoidance of the truth." Also,
      the degree of participation in business affairs is probative of
      knowledge.

Ibid. (citations omitted).

   /5/ Despite petitioners' attempts to minimize the role (and, thus,
the knowledge) of petitioner Weiland, the record reflects that Weiland
was a principal shareholder and officer of the corporations and,
together with petitioner McCann, created and developed the business,
controlled its financial affairs, wrote the deceptive sales scripts,
and reviewed the sales reports and other information.  Pet. App.
88-89, Exh. 3, at 19-20.  Moreover, Weiland regularly consulted with
McCann regarding the daily sales operation.
