August 1996


  Police Practice: An Alternative To Police Pursuits

   By Clyde Eisenberg, M.A. and Cynthia Fitzpatrick

_______________

Corporal Eisenberg and Corporal Fitzpatrick serve with the
Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office in Tampa, Florida.
_______________

Hollywood has long glorified the high-speed chase in television
and film accounts of police work. Yet, rarely do the
action-packed vehicle pursuits portrayed on screen show the
tragedy that often accompanies them in real life. Forty percent
of all law enforcement pursuits end in a collision, and
approximately 290 pursuit-related deaths occur each year.1

Within the last decade, vehicle pursuits have become a leading
concern to law enforcement administrators throughout the country.
Liability issues, coupled with negative media attention, have
spurred this concern. In addition, organizations such as
Solutions to Tragedies of Police Pursuits (STOPP) now lobby for
federal laws to regulate law enforcement pursuits and urge law
enforcement agencies to adopt rigid pursuit policies in the name
of public safety.2

Even without such pressure, many agencies have adopted stringent
policies, often only permitting officers to pursue individuals
suspected of committing forcible felonies. But this leaves law
enforcement administrators to face the dilemma of either allowing
non-violent felons to escape or risking property damage, personal
injury, or death from pursuits. Both options leave the department
open to public criticism and potential lawsuits.

Law enforcement agencies clearly need an alternative to the
traditional pursuit. Yet, no single method will avoid all
pursuits. Some pursuits occur when the suspect flees the scene of
a crime or an already-speeding subject refuses to stop for the
authorities. Other pursuits, however, result when an officer
identifies a wanted felon and attempts to make an apprehension.
When the officer turns on the lights and sirens to indicate that
the suspect should stop, the suspect flees and the officer gives
chase. The Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office (HCSO) in Tampa,
Florida, developed the Vehicle Intercept Program to replace the
latter type of pursuit.

What is a Vehicle Intercept?

Vehicle interception rests on the premise that most suspects in
vehicles will not flee as long as officers keep their lights and
sirens off, thus giving deputies the opportunity to develop a
plan of containment. A vehicle intercept uses law enforcement
automobiles to block in a suspect's vehicle that is slowing,
stopped, or just beginning to move at an intersection, driveway,
or parking lot.

Officers position their automobiles according to pre-set
guidelines and procedures. A vehicle intercept is not a moving
road block, and suspect cars traveling more than 10 miles per
hour are not considered viable intercept candidates.

Creation of the Vehicle Intercept Program

In response to a proposal submitted by the authors, the sheriff
convened a 10-member committee to examine the vehicle intercept
concept and, if it was found plausible, to develop a training
module for the department. Sworn personnel from the canine,
aviation, training, detective, and patrol bureaus served on the
committee. They met over a 1-week period and discussed procedures
and guidelines for vehicle intercepts.

The committee also conducted some practical experiments to
determine the optimum vehicle positioning for intercepts, taking
into account concerns for officer safety, such as cross-fire and
possible air bag deployment. The sheriff approved the committee's
recommendations, which became part of the HCSO's written standard
operating procedure and training curriculum.

Intercept Procedure

Only two categories of drivers qualify for interception--felony
suspects and impaired drivers who pose a threat to public safety.
Once deputies determine that a vehicle contains a suspected felon
or an impaired driver, they do not take any overt action that
might alert the occupants of the target vehicle of impending law
enforcement action. Deputies refrain from activating emergency
equipment and appear to conduct routine patrol while they notify
dispatch, giving a description of the target vehicle, current
location, direction of travel, and suspected charges.

Next, deputies communicate via radio with other units that can
respond to assist. Setting up the intercept requires tactical
thinking; officers must consider what intersections and other
road conditions lie in the path of the target vehicle that would
be conducive to an intercept. Ideally, aviation and canine units
would participate, but deputies may execute a vehicle intercept
without their assistance. When other units have reached the area
and the intercept site has been chosen, the deputies--as many as
four units--determine the positions they will take.

Without activating any emergency equipment, the primary blocking
unit pulls in front of the target vehicle at the designated
location as it slows, is stopped, or is starting to pull away.
The primary unit takes a position perpendicular to the target
vehicle, with the passenger side facing the suspect's vehicle and
the rear axle in line with the front center of the target
vehicle.

A second police unit simultaneously barricades the rear of the
target vehicle. Emergency lights can be activated now. If more
than two law enforcement units participate, two can block the
rear or one can be deployed facing the target vehicle's driver
side door from a distance of 20 to 60 feet.

The deputy operating the primary blocking vehicle stays in the
car until other deputies have secured the scene. This precaution
prevents potential injury to the deputy if the target vehicle
attempts to break through the block. It also limits the chance of
a cross-fire situation developing.

The suspect(s) then are removed from the target vehicle using the
high-risk felony stop method or whatever is appropriate for the
situation. If the target vehicle breaks through an intercept,
deputies respond according to the HCSO's standard vehicle pursuit
policy.

Guidelines for Intercepts

The decision to use or participate in a vehicle intercept rests
solely with each deputy and does not require supervisory
authorization. When deputies decide to intercept a vehicle, they
cannot use citizens' vehicles to form any part of the blockade,
such as when a suspect stops in a line of traffic. Two-officer
patrol vehicles cannot be used as the front blocker due to the
potential danger to the officer on the passenger side. Finally,
marked and unmarked cars may participate in vehicle intercepts.

Training

Vehicle intercept training consists of a 4-hour module divided
into two segments--classroom instruction and practical exercises.
The 2 hours of classroom instruction open with a presentation of
videotapes and newspaper articles illustrating the critical
attention given to police pursuits by the media. Civil liability
also is discussed to emphasize the importance of alternatives to
high-speed pursuits.

The instructors then present the guidelines and procedures for
vehicle intercepts, using diagrams to show vehicle positioning.
Audiotapes of radio transmissions during actual intercepts are
played and critiqued to give the students a clear sense of how to
organize an intercept. Throughout the classroom session, deputies
are encouraged to ask questions and voice concerns and criticisms
of the program. The aim is to ensure that the students are
comfortable with the procedure and to correct any perceived flaws
in it.

The second segment consists of practical exercises on the
training center's driving pad. Every deputy must complete a
minimum of two vehicle intercepts HCSO driving instructors
scrutinize and evaluate deputies' driving technique, vehicle
positioning, and radio transmissions.

Initial vehicle intercept training for the agency occurred over
an 8-month period. From February to October 1995, approximately
700 sworn personnel, including deputies and detectives, completed
both segments of the course.

Field Results

As of May 31, 1996, approximately 60 vehicle intercepts have been
performed. Of those, only two vehicles broke through intercepts,
one of which resulted in minor injuries to a deputy. It is
difficult to calculate precisely how many pursuits these
intercepts have prevented; however, HCSO deputies agree that most
of the target vehicles would not have yielded to standard law
enforcement approaches. Post-pursuit data indicate a 50-percent
reduction in pursuits since HCSO deputies were trained in vehicle
interception.

Vehicle Intercept Program Benefits

The Vehicle Intercept Program does not eliminate the need for all
police pursuits, but it does provide a viable alternative to many
of them. Apprehending suspected felons without protracted,
dangerous chases protects the lives and property of the public,
the police, and the suspects.

This pursuit alternative also assuages concerns of those who
perceive law enforcement as soft on crime when agencies restrict
pursuits to suspected violent felons. It demonstrates to them a
genuine effort to apprehend all felony suspects in the safest
manner possible.

The Vehicle Intercept Program also can generate some positive
press coverage. Agencies should not overlook the public relations
benefits and should publicize their efforts. Finally, vehicle
intercepts result in fewer police pursuits, which translates into
fewer liability claims against an agency.

Conclusion

As the nature and frequency of vehicle pursuits have changed in
recent years, law enforcement agencies have been forced to
reconsider their traditional practices. As demonstrated by the
Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office Vehicle Intercept Program,
alternatives to pursuits do exist and work. If law enforcement
officers rethink the way they approach suspects in vehicles,
offenders can be apprehended without the unnecessary endangerment
of life and property caused by police pursuits.

Endnotes

1 P. Thrash, "Police Pursuit Considerations," Law Enforcement
Technology, vol. 9, 1994, 28-30.
2 B.L. Dorgan, "The National Police Pursuit Policy Act of 1995,"
Congressional Record, Proceedings and Debates of the 104th
Congress, First Session, 141 (97).