Pliocene Palynomorph Census Data from the Pinecrest Beds (Tamiami
Formation) in Quality Aggregates Phase 6 Pit, southwestern Florida

by Debra A. Willard

Mail Stop 970
U.S. Geological Survey
Reston, Va. 22092

U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 93-563


INTRODUCTION

The U.S. Geological Survey is conducting a long-term study of the climatic
and terrestrial conditions of the Pliocene.  One of the major elements of
the study involves the estimation of vegetational composition and
abundance from palynomorph assemblages and the estimation of terrestrial
paleotemperatures based on vegetational abundance and distribution.  Many
samples will be analyzed during the project, resulting in a large volume
of raw census data.  In addition, it is likely that all or some of the
census data from individual sites will be incorporated into analyses for
more than one report over the course of the project. Therefore we have
decided to make the raw census data available in a series of open-file
reports that will provide basic data for future work.  In this report, raw
census data is presented for 47 palynomorph assemblages from the Pinecrest
Beds (Tamiami Formation) of southwestern Florida (Fig. 1).

FIGURE 1.  Location of Quality Aggregates Phase 6 Pit (QA6).

  [Editor's note: This figure depicts the state of Florida, with the
  location of QA6 marked.  QA6 is located on the west side of the
  penninsula south and east of Tampa Bay.  Because it simply shows the
  location and contains no other information, this figure was not
  converted to a more portable format.  It is embedded in the original
  report, which is contained in the self-extracting archive file
  of92-563.sea.hqx in the Derived section; the report is presented there
  in Microsoft Word format.]

GEOLOGICAL SETTING

The Pinecrest Beds of the Tamiami Formation consist of coarse sands with
an extremely diverse molluscan fauna, which has been studied intensively
by paleontologists (Allmon, et al., 1991; Jones, et al., 1991).  These
units are exposed particularly well in the Quality Aggregates Phase 6 Pit
(Lat. 27 degrees 21'45" N, Long. 82 degrees 26'23" W) near Sarasota,
Florida, hereafter referred to as QA6.  The Pinecrest Beds range from
about 2 Ma to more than 3.5 Ma (Jones, et al., 1991), and they have been
subdivided informally into eleven units based on molluscan composition
(Petuch, 1982).  Of these eleven units, six are exposed at QA6 (Fig. 2),
and these were sampled intensively to establish the composition of the
regional vegetation throughout the time period, to determine how variable
the vegetation was during mid- to Late Pliocene time, and to estimate
Pliocene temperatures and precipitation.  A detailed interpretation of the
vegetational history of the site is provided in Willard, et al. (1993).

[Editor's note: Location is 27.3625 degrees North, 82.439722 degrees West,
specified to nearest second of latitude and longitude.]

METHODS

Samples were collected at 20 cm intervals at four sampling sites in QA6 in
order to maximize stratigraphic coverage.  The relative locations of these
sites, the units sampled, and the sample intervals are illustrated in
Fig. 2.  Samples weighing about 80 grams were collected for pollen
preparation.  Sediments first  were screened through an 850 um mesh to
remove shelly debris.  Then, samples were decalcified using hydrochloric
acid and demineralized using hydrofluoric acid.  The neutralized residue
was suspended in a dilute detergent solution to keep clay-sized particles
in suspension and filtered through an 8 µm nylon mesh to remove the clay-
sized particles.  Organic and mineral matter then were separated using a
heavy-liquid flotation with zinc chloride (specific gravity =2.0).
Organic material was removed, washed, and stained with Bismarck Brown
before being mixed with warm glycerine jelly  and mounted on microscope
slides.  For most samples, 300 palynomorphs (excluding pollen of aquatic
angiosperms and spores of lower vascular plants) were counted; for samples
with relatively sparse pollen, data were included if at least 100
palynomorphs were counted.  Raw counts for taxa (genera and families)
contained in each sample are provided in Table 1.

Table 1.  Raw counts of palynomorphs in samples from the Pinecrest Beds
(Tamiami Fm.), Quality Aggregates Phase 6 Pit, near Sarasota, Florida.
"P" indicates that the taxon was present in the sample but not included
in the count.  [Editor's note: Table 1 is included separately in the file
Core/raw/table1.txt]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I thank T. Cronin and S. Ishman for reviewing this manuscript and G.
Belair for assistance with sample preparation. I also thank W. Allmon, T.
Cronin, D. Jones, K. Ketcher, R. Portell, and L. Wingard for field
assistance.  This report is a product of the PRISM (Pliocene Research,
Interpretation, and Synoptic Mapping) Project.
 
REFERENCES

Allmon, W.D., Rosenberg, G., Portell, R.W., and Schindler, K.S., 1993,
Diversity of Atlantic Coastal Plain mollusks since the Pliocene, Science,
v. 260, p. 1626-1629.

Jones, D. S., MacFadden, B.J., Webb, S.D., Mueller, P.A., Hodell, D.A.,
and Cronin, T.M., 1991, Integrated geochronology of a classic Pliocene
fossil site in Florida:  linking marine and terrestrial biochronologies,
Journal of Geology, v. 99, p. 637-648.

Petuch, E.J., 1982, Notes on the molluscan paleoecology of the Pinecrest
Beds at Sarasota, Florida with the description of Pyruella, a
stratigraphically important new genus (Gastropoda:  Melongenidae),
Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, v. 134, p.
12-30.

Willard, D.A., Cronin, T.M., Ishman, S.E., and Litwin, R.J., 1993,
Terrestrial and marine records of climatic and environmental changes
during the Pliocene in subtropical Florida, Geology, v. 21, p. 679-682.

(end)
