72 FR 13239, March 21 2007  

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

International Trade Administration

[A-570-888]
 
Floor-Standing, Metal-Top Ironing Tables and Certain Parts 
Thereof from the People's Republic of China: Final Results and Final 
Rescission, In Part, of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review

AGENCY: Import Administration, International Trade Administration, 
Department of Commerce.
SUMMARY: On September 12, 2006, the U.S. Department of Commerce (the 
Department) published the preliminary results of the first 
administrative review of the antidumping duty order on floor-standing, 
metal-top ironing tables and certain parts thereof (ironing tables) 
from the People's Republic of China

[[Page 13240]]

(PRC). See Floor-Standing, Metal-Top Ironing Tables and Certain Parts 
Thereof from the People's Republic of China: Preliminary Results of 
Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, 71 FR 53655, (September 12, 
2006) (Preliminary Results). This review covers three producer/
exporters: (1) Since Hardware (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd. (Since Hardware); 
(2) Forever Holdings Ltd. (Forever Holdings); and (3) Foshan Shunde 
Yongjian Houseware & Hardware Co., Ltd. (Foshan Shunde). The period of 
review (POR) is February 3, 2004, through July 31, 2005. We have made 
changes to certain surrogate values based on our analysis of the 
record, including factual information obtained since the preliminary 
results. Therefore, the final results differ from the preliminary 
results. We are also rescinding this review with respect to Shunde 
Yongjian Houseware Co., Ltd. (Shunde Yongjian). See ``Final Results of 
Review'' section below.

EFFECTIVE DATE: March 21, 2007.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Kristina Horgan or Bobby Wong, AD/CVD 
Operations, Office 9, Import Administration, International Trade 
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and 
Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20230; telephone: (202) 482-
8173 or (202) 482-0409, respectively.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

    We published the preliminary results of the third administrative 
review on September 12, 2006 in the Federal Register. See Preliminary 
Results.
    Since the Preliminary Results the following events have occurred:
    On August 31, 2006, we issued a supplemental questionnaire to 
Foshan Shunde to inquire about its relationship with Shunde Yongjian. 
On September 14, 2006, we received the supplemental questionnaire 
response from Foshan Shunde, and an addendum to that response on 
September 15, 2006. On September 20, 2006, we extended the time limit 
for submitting further information to value the factors of production 
until October 16, 2006. On October 16, 2006, we received a surrogate 
value submission from Home Products International Inc. (petitioner).
    From November 13 through 16, 2006, the Department conducted a 
verification of Since Hardware's sales and factors of production 
information at Since Hardware's facilities in Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
PRC. See Memorandum to the File from James Doyle, Director, Office 9, 
and Carrie Blozy, Program Manager, Office 9, regarding Verification of 
the Sales and Factors Response of Since Hardware (Guangzhou) Co. Ltd. 
in the First Antidumping Administrative Review of Floor-Standing, 
Metal-Top Ironing Tables People's Republic of China (January 22, 2007) 
(Since Hardware Verification Report).
    From January 9 through 12, 2007, the Department conducted a 
verification of Foshan Shunde's sales and factors of production 
information at Foshan Shunde's facilities in Foshan, Guangdong, PRC. 
See Memorandum to the File from Kristina Horgan, Senior Case Analyst, 
Office 9, and Bobby Wong, Case Analyst, Office 9, regarding 
Verification of the Sales & Factors Responses of Foshan Shunde Yongjian 
Housewares & Hardware Co., Ltd. in the Antidumping Duty Review of 
Floor-Standing Metal-Top Ironing Tables and Parts Thereof from the 
People's Republic of China (January 22, 2007) (Foshan Shunde 
Verification Report).
    We invited parties to comment on our Preliminary Results. On 
January 24, 2007, Since Hardware requested a one-day extension of the 
deadline to submit case briefs, and on January 25, 2007, the Department 
granted that request. We received case briefs from petitioner, Since 
Hardware, Forever Holdings, and Foshan Shunde on January 30, 2007. On 
February 2, 2007, we requested comments on the Department's revised 
expected non-market economy (NME) wage rate. We received rebuttal 
briefs from petitioner, Since Hardware, and Forever Holdings on 
February 5, 2007.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Since Hardware commented on the newly posted NME wage rate 
in its case brief, while Forever Holdings commented on the 
calculation of the NME wage rate in both its case brief and rebuttal 
brief.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scope of the Antidumping Duty Order

    For purposes of this order, the product covered consists of floor-
standing, metal-top ironing tables, assembled or unassembled, complete 
or incomplete, and certain parts thereof. The subject tables are 
designed and used principally for the hand ironing or pressing of 
garments or other articles of fabric. The subject tables have full-
height leg assemblies that support the ironing surface at an 
appropriate (often adjustable) height above the floor. The subject 
tables are produced in a variety of leg finishes, such as painted, 
plated, or matte, and they are available with various features, 
including iron rests, linen racks, and others. The subject ironing 
tables may be sold with or without a pad and/or cover. All types and 
configurations of floor-standing, metal-top ironing tables are covered 
by this review.
    Furthermore, this order specifically covers imports of ironing 
tables, assembled or unassembled, complete or incomplete, and certain 
parts thereof. For purposes of this order, the term ``unassembled'' 
ironing table means a product requiring the attachment of the leg 
assembly to the top or the attachment of an included feature such as an 
iron rest or linen rack. The term ``complete'' ironing table means 
product sold as a ready-to-use ensemble consisting of the metal-top 
table and a pad and cover, with or without additional features, e.g. 
iron rest or linen rack. The term ``incomplete'' ironing table means 
product shipped or sold as a ``bare board'' i.e., a metal-top table 
only, without the pad and cover with or without additional features, 
e.g. iron rest or linen rack. The major parts or components of ironing 
tables that are intended to be covered by this order under the term 
``certain parts thereof'' consist of the metal top component (with or 
without assembled supports and slides) and/or the leg components, 
whether or not attached together as a leg assembly. The order covers 
separately shipped metal top components and leg components, without 
regard to whether the respective quantities would yield an exact 
quantity of assembled ironing tables.
    Ironing tables without legs (such as models that mount on walls or 
over doors) are not floor-standing and are specifically excluded. 
Additionally, tabletop or countertop models with short legs that do not 
exceed 12 inches in length (and which may or may not collapse or 
retract) are specifically excluded.
    The subject ironing tables were previously classified under 
Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS) subheading 
9403.20.0010. Effective July 1, 2003, the subject ironing tables are 
classified under new HTSUS subheading 9403.20.0011. The subject metal 
top and leg components are classified under HTSUS subheading 
9403.90.8040. Although the HTSUS subheadings are provided for 
convenience and for Customs and Border Protection (CBP) purposes, the 
Department's written description of the scope remains dispositive.

Separate Rates

    Since Hardware, Forever Holdings, and Foshan Shunde requested 
separate, company-specific antidumping duty rates. In the Preliminary 
Results, we found that Since Hardware, Forever Holdings, and Foshan 
Shunde all met the criteria for the application of a separate 
antidumping duty rate. See Preliminary Results, 71 FR at 53656-

[[Page 13241]]

53658. The Department did not receive comments on this issue prior to 
these final results. Moreover, we have not received any information 
since the Preliminary Results with respect to Since Hardware, Forever 
Holdings, and Foshan Shunde that would warrant reconsideration of our 
separate-rates determinations with respect to these companies. 
Therefore, we have assigned individual dumping margins to Since 
Hardware, Forever Holdings, and Foshan Shunde for this review period.

Analysis of Comments Received

    All issues raised in the briefs are addressed in the Memorandum to 
David M. Spooner, Assistant Secretary for Import Administration, from 
Stephen J. Claeys, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Import 
Administration, regarding Issues and Decision Memorandum for the Final 
Results in the First Administrative Review of Floor-standing, Metal-top 
Ironing Tables and Certain Parts Thereof from the People's Republic of 
China (March 12, 2007) (Issues and Decision Memorandum), which is 
hereby adopted by this notice. A list of the issues raised, all of 
which are in the Issues and Decision Memorandum, is attached to this 
notice as Appendix I. Parties can find a complete discussion of all 
issues raised in the briefs and the corresponding recommendations in 
this public memorandum, which is on file in the Central Records Unit 
(CRU), room B-099 of the Department of Commerce. In addition, a 
complete version of the Issues and Decision Memorandum can be accessed 
directly on the Web at http://trade.gov/ia. The paper copy and 

electronic version of the Issues and Decision Memorandum are identical 
in content.

Partial Rescission of Administrative Review

    In the Preliminary Results, the Department issued a notice of 
intent to rescind this administrative review with respect to Shunde 
Yongjian. We stated in the Preliminary Results that if we determined 
not to collapse Foshan Shunde and Shunde Yongjian, and if we found that 
Foshan Shunde is not the successor in interest to Shunde Yongjian, we 
would rescind the review with respect to Shunde Yongjian because the 
company had no entries of subject merchandise during the POR. See 
Preliminary Results, 71 FR at 53656. Based on our analysis of 
information and comments received from interested parties on this 
issue, as discussed in depth in the accompanying Issues and Decision 
Memorandum at Comment 8, the Department has determined that Foshan 
Shunde and Shunde Yongjian should not be collapsed and that Foshan 
Shunde is not the successor-in-interest to Shunde Yongjian. Therefore, 
the Department is rescinding this administrative review with respect to 
Shunde Yongjian, but will continue to calculate a separate rate for 
Foshan Shunde. See ``Separate Rates'' section above.

Changes since the Preliminary Results

    Based on the comments received from the interested parties and 
findings at verification, we have made the following company-specific 
changes to Since Hardware's margin calculation: 1) The Department will 
add a freight factor to Since Hardware's calculated normal value to 
account for the freight distance between its factory and leased 
processing facilities. See Issues and Decision Memorandum, at Comment 6 
and Since Hardware Verification Report at 2. 1) The Department will 
include brokerage and handling expenses, which Since Hardware incurred 
from a non-market economy (NME) supplier, on all of its imports of 
material inputs. See Issues and Decision Memorandum, at Comment 6 and 
Since Hardware Verification Report at 2 and 20.
    Additionally, based on the comments received from the interested 
parties, we have made the following company-specific changes to Forever 
Holdings' margin calculation: 1) The Department has changed the source 
used to value welding wire from the surrogate value for welding rod to 
the surrogate value for welding wire. See Issues and Decision 
Memorandum, at Comment 12. 2) The Department has valued accelerant 
using the surrogate value for sodium nitrite instead of the surrogate 
value used in the Preliminary Results. See Issues and Decision 
Memorandum, at Comment 12.
    Based on the comments received from the interested parties and 
findings at verification, we have made the following company-specific 
changes to Foshan Shunde's margin calculation: 1) The Department has 
recalculated Foshan Shunde's water factor of production, based on 
verification findings. See Foshan Shunde Verification Report at 2 and 
Memorandum to the File through Christopher D. Riker, Program Manager, 
AD/CVD Operations, Office 9, from Kristina Horgan, Senior International 
Trade Compliance Analyst, AD/CVD Operations, Office 9, regarding Foshan 
Shunde Yongjian Houseware & Hardware Co., Ltd. (Foshan Shunde) Analysis 
Memorandum for the Final Results of Review (March 12, 2007) (Foshan 
Shunde Analysis Memo) at 2. 2) The Department has not used Foshan 
Shunde's reported plug input in the normal value calculation, based on 
verification findings. See Foshan Shunde Verification Report at 2 and 
Foshan Shunde Analysis Memo at 2. 3) The Department has also added 
Foshan Shunde's by-product to the normal value calculation, instead of 
subtracting it as was done in the Preliminary Results. See Issues and 
Decision Memorandum, at Comment 10, and Foshan Shunde Analysis Memo at 
3.
    For the final results, we also revised our calculation of surrogate 
financial ratios for factory overhead, selling, general and 
administrative expenses, and profit, to use the 2005 annual report from 
Infiniti Modules Pvt. Ltd. (Infiniti Modules), and used these ratios in 
our margin calculations. See Issues and Decision Memorandum, at 
Comments 1 and 2. We also used the revised NME wage rate, as posted on 
the Department's website on February 2, 2007. See Issues and Decision 
Memorandum, at Comment 3. Finally, we revised the surrogate value for 
hot rolled steel for the final results. See Issues and Decision 
Memorandum, at Comment 5.

Final Results of Review

    We determine that the following antidumping duty margins exist:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Exporter                         Margin (percent)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since Hardware (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd.................               0.51%
Foshan Shunde Yongjian Houseware & Hardware Co.,                   2.37%
 Ltd................................................
Forever Holdings Ltd................................              10.18%
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    For details on the calculation of the antidumping duty weighted-
average margin for each company, see the respective company's analysis 
memorandum for the final results of the first administrative review of 
the antidumping duty order on ironing tables from the PRC, dated March 
12, 2007. Public versions of these memoranda are on file in the CRU.

Assessment Rates

    Pursuant to 19 CFR 351.212(b), the Department will determine, and 
CBP shall assess, antidumping duties on all appropriate entries. The 
Department intends to issue assessment instructions to CBP 15 days 
after the date of publication of these final results of review. For 
assessment purposes, where possible, we calculated importer-specific 
assessment rates for ironing tables from the PRC via ad valorem duty 
assessment rates based on the ratio of the total amount of the dumping

[[Page 13242]]

margins calculated for the examined sales to the total entered value of 
those same sales. We will instruct CBP to assess antidumping duties on 
all appropriate entries covered by this review.

Cash Deposit Requirements

    The following cash deposit requirements will be effective upon 
publication of these final results of this administrative review for 
all shipments of the subject merchandise entered, or withdrawn from 
warehouse, for consumption on or after the publication date, as 
provided for by section 751(a)(2)(C) of the Act: (1) for the exporters 
listed above, the cash deposit rate will be established in these final 
results of review (except, if the rate is zero or de minimis, i.e., 
less than 0.5 percent, no cash deposit will be required for that 
company); (2) for previously investigated or reviewed PRC and non-PRC 
exporters not listed above that have separate rates, the cash deposit 
rate will continue to be the exporter-specific rate published for the 
most recent period; (3) for all PRC exporters of subject merchandise 
which have not been found to be entitled to a separate rate, the cash 
deposit rate will be the PRC-wide rate of 157.68 percent; and (4) for 
all non-PRC exporters of subject merchandise which have not received 
their own rate, the cash deposit rate will be the rate applicable to 
the PRC exporters that supplied that non-PRC exporter. These deposit 
requirements, when imposed, shall remain in effect until publication of 
the final results of the next administrative review.

Notification to Interested Parties

    This notice also serves as the final reminder to importers of their 
responsibility under 19 CFR 351.402(f) to file a certificate regarding 
the reimbursement of antidumping duties prior to liquidation of the 
relevant entries during this review period. Failure to comply with this 
requirement could result in the Secretary's presumption that 
reimbursement of antidumping duties occurred and in the subsequent 
assessment of double antidumping duties.
    This notice also serves as the only reminder to parties subject to 
administrative protective order (APO) of their responsibility 
concerning the return/destruction or conversion to judicial protective 
order of proprietary information disclosed under APO in accordance with 
19 CFR 351.305(a)(3). Failure to comply is a violation of the APO.
    This administrative review and this notice are published in 
accordance with sections 751(a)(1) and 777(i)(1) of the Act.

    Dated: March 12, 2007.
David M. Spooner,
Assistant Secretaryfor Import Administration.

Appendix I

General Issues

Comment 1: Appropriate Source for Financial Ratios Surrogate Values
Comment 2: Classification of Labor in Financial Ratios
Comment 3: NME Wage Rate
Comment 4: Zeroing
Comment 5: Appropriate Surrogate Value for Hot-Rolled Steel

Company-Specific Issues

Since Hardware-Related Issues

Comment 6: Market Economy Purchases
Comment 7: By-Product Offset

Foshan Shunde-Related Issues

Comment 8: Rescission of Shunde Yongjian and Foshan Shunde
Comment 9: Calculating a Margin for Foshan Shunde
Comment 10: By-Product Clerical Error

Forever Holdings-Related Issues

Comment 11: Rescission of Forever Holdings
Comment 12: Clerical Errors in Surrogate Values
[FR Doc. E7-5170 Filed 3-20-02; 8:45 am]