1st Meeting of Standing Committee on Biotechnology
                                           Release No. 0146.00 
Remarks
          As Prepared for Delivery
                               by
              Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman
                 National Academy of Sciences 
       1st Meeting of Standing Committee on Biotechnology
         Food and Fiber Production, and The Environment
                 Washington, D.C.   May 4, 2000

     "Thank you very much.  I'm glad to be here for your first meeting, and I
want to thank you for serving.  I believe that this Standing Committee will
only strengthen the long-standing partnership between USDA and NAS, helping
our farmers become more productive and giving consumers around the world a
healthier and more abundant food supply.  

     "Deputy Secretary Rominger will talk more in a minute about how you can
best help us in your review of our biotechnology approval process.  But I want
to focus, for the few minutes that I have, on the Clinton Administration's new
set of biotechnology initiatives   what they are, what they mean, and what
role there might be for NAS.

     "I believe in biotechnology and all the good it can do.  And I believe
in the safety of biotechnology products.  But I also believe that we must
remain ever-vigilant and responsive to legitimate questions and concerns. 
It's clear, from the intense public debate we've all seen over the last year
or two, that there is no consensus on biotechnology.  Not in the United
States...and certainly not in Europe and other global markets.

     "We realize that we have to do more.  We have to make every effort to
ensure that our biotech approval process is built upon the most up-to-date
science.  But we also have to do a better job of communicating with consumers. 
We have to provide them with more information about genetic engineering that
they can understand.  We have to give them the confidence that only those
foods deemed safe for the environment and for human consumption will make it
to their grocery store shelves.

     "This Administration is committed to assuring that our food supply is
safe.  We have a record that demonstrates that commitment.  We have
effectively used sound science and sound judgment to reduce foodborne illness
in the US and to reduce the exposure of children to pesticide residues on
food.  Our efforts have also ensured the safety of every agricultural biotech
product on the market today, and these efforts will continue into the future
as we will serve to ensure the overall safety of products and applications
that we can barely even imagine today.
                                
     "That last point, about the future, is important.  We also have to plan
for the future and whatever biotechnology marvels or challenges it has in
store.  That means conducting more forward-looking research and ensuring that
our regulations keep pace with innovation.  The technology is evolving
rapidly.  But we can't let it move faster than our ability to manage it --
this will require greater adaptability and increased commitments on the part
of the Administration.

     "So that is what the new Administration initiatives are all about  
strengthening our science-based regulation of agricultural biotechnology;
providing consumers with both accurate information and a safe food supply;
preparing for future innovations; as well as promoting commerce and providing
market opportunities for U.S. farmers. 

     "Getting to the specifics of the plan...to strengthen and update our
regulatory framework, the Administration will assess developments in the
technology and carefully review all biotech-related federal environmental
regulations, making recommendations, as needed, to enhance the system. 

     "Secondly, the initiative will require that companies give adequate
notice to FDA before releasing new biotech products to consumers.  Both the
information submitted by the company and the FDA's conclusion about the
product's safety will be made available to the public. 

     "The plan also calls for a significant increase in peer-reviewed,
competitively awarded research to examine safety issues surrounding
biotechnology and to support our regulatory decisions.  NAS will be an
especially important partner in this effort, as we try to identify any gaps in
our scientific knowledge. 

     "To enhance consumer information and to support the marketing of
agricultural products, FDA will develop guidelines for voluntary biotech food
labels that are clear and truthful.  Similarly, USDA will initiate efforts to
help develop testing procedures and quality assurance programs designed to
differentiate non-biotech commodities and to better meet the needs of the
market.  Both USDA and FDA will involve the public, the industry and farmers
in the development of these initiatives.  

     "There will also be an enhanced public outreach effort to increase
understanding about our biotech regulatory process.  And, finally, USDA will
also help farmers analyze the demand for biotech products, helping them make
sound planting and marketing decisions. 

     "Some of the new initiatives are brand-new; others build on things we're
already doing.  For example, the assessment of environmental regulations comes
on top of the science reviews we've asked NAS to undertake.  USDA is already
working to validate GMO testing and to accredit labs that conduct the testing. 
Public education and outreach have already been enhanced through the
establishment of this NAS Standing Committee and the Department's newly formed
Advisory Committee on Agricultural Biotechnology.  

     "I am confident that these new steps will help biotechnology maximize
its awesome potential --  to feed a hungry and growing world...to increase
agricultural productivity...to preserve natural resources...and so on.  But
the plan also asks the federal government to take on new mandates and
responsibilities.  To fulfill them, without a doubt we'll be turning to NAS
for guidance and support.  We have the utmost respect for your expertise, and
we look forward to working with you on this project and many others for years
to come.  Thank you."

                              # # #




