---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emerging Infectious Diseases * Volume 2 * Number 4 * October-December 1996
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Synopses

Chlamydiae as Pathogens: New Species and New Issues

Rosanna W. Peeling* and Robert C. Brunham†
*Laboratory Centre for Disease Control Health, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
†Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The recognition of genital chlamydial infection as an important
    public health problem was made first by the recognition of its
    role in acute clinical syndromes, as well as in serious
    reproductive and ocular complications, and secondly by our
    awareness of its prevalence when diagnostic tests became widely
    accessible. The recent availability of effective single dose oral
    antimicrobial therapy and sensitive molecular amplification tests
    that allow the use of noninvasive specimens for diagnosis and
    screening is expected to have a major impact in reducing the
    prevalence of disease in the next decade. Clinical manifestations
    associated with Chlamydia pneumoniae infection continue to emerge
    beyond respiratory illness. In particular, its association with
    atherosclerosis deserves further investigation. Chlamydia pecorum,
    a pathogen of ruminants, was recently recognized as a new species.
    The continued application of molecular techniques will likely
    elucidate an expanding role for chlamydiae in human and animal
    diseases, delineate the phylogenetic relationships among
    chlamydial species and within the eubacteria domain, and provide
    tools for detection and control of chlamydial infections.

Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacteria that grow in eukaryotic
cells and cause a wide spectrum of human disease (Table). Species were
grouped according to their biologic and biochemical properties and a
greater than 95% homology in their 16s ribosomal RNA sequences (1).
Molecular analyses led to the reclassification of some Chlamydia psittaci
strains as Chlamydia pneumoniae, a human pathogen, and Chlamydia pecorum, a
pathogen of ruminants. Given the diverse host range of C. psittaci strains,
more reclassification within this species may be likely.

           Table. Spectrum of human diseases caused by Chlamydiae
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Species        Acute Diseases          Sequelae/Chronic Diseases
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. trachomatis
  Serovars A-C conjunctivitis          trachoma
  Serovars D-K urethritis              proctitis, epididymo-orchitis,
                                       Reiter's Syndrome
               cervicitis              pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic
                                       pregnancy, tubal infertility,
                                       Fitz-Hugh Curtis Syndrome
               ophthalmia neonatorum
               neonatal pneumonia
  LGV serovars lymphogranuloma
               venereum
C. pneumoniae  pharyngitis             ?cardiovascular disease
               sinusitis               ?asthma
               bronchitis
               community-acquired
               pneumonia

C. psittaci
  parrot       atypical pneumonia
  canaries     hepatic and renal
  pigeons      dysfunction
  turkeys      endocarditis
  ducks
  chickens
  cats         conjunctivitis
  ewes         abortion
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The oldest reported disease associated with C. trachomatis infection is
trachoma, a sequela of ocular infection. This disease was described in
China and in the Ebers papyrus in Egypt thousands of years ago and
continues to be a major cause of preventable blindness, with an estimated
500 million cases of active trachoma worldwide (seven million include
blindness from conjunctival scarring and eyelid deformities [2]). In the
last two decades, genital chlamydial infection has been identified as a
major public health problem because of the recognition that chlamydial
infection is associated with disease syndromes such as nongonococcal
urethritis, mucopurulent cervicitis, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID),
ectopic pregnancy, and tubal infertility. The World Health Organization
estimated 89 million new cases of genital chlamydial infections worldwide
in 1995 (3). In the United States, each year an estimated four million new
cases occur and 50,000 women become infertile as a result of infection (4).

C. psittaci infection, acquired through respiratory droplet transmission of
chlamydiae from infected birds, has been considered for many years an
occupational hazard for employees of pet shops and poultry processing
plants (5). Sources of human C. psittaci infection other than infected
birds have been identified and may
                             [end of page 307]

be more common than currently recognized. Detection of C. psittaci in
household cats and breeding catteries illustrates the expanding number of
chlamydial diseases in animals that are transmissible to humans (6,7).

C. pneumoniae is a human pathogen recognized as an important cause of
respiratory illness (8). Approximately 40% to 60% of adult populations
around the world have antibodies to C. pneumoniae, which suggests that the
infection is extraordinarily prevalent, and reinfection is common. Current
interest centers on the emerging role of C. pneumoniae infection in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and asthma.

Biology of Chlamydiae: An Update

Chlamydiae have a unique biphasic life cycle with dimorphic forms that are
functionally and morphologically distinct. An extracellular form, the
elementary body (EB), is infectious but metabolically inactive. Once
endocytosed, the EB differentiates into a larger pleomorphic form called
the reticulate body (RB), which replicates by binary fission. The precise
mechanism by which EBs attach and gain entry into the host cell is unknown.
Recent work suggests that chlamydiae employ a molecular mimic of heparan
sulfate to attach to glycosaminoglycan (GAG) receptors on eukaryotic cell
surfaces (9). GAG appears to form a trimolecular complex with the host cell
since (EB) infectivity is inhibited by the addition of heparan or heparan
sulfate to culture, and pretreatment of EBs with heparan sulfate lyase
abolishes EB infectivity. The mechanism of endocytic uptake remains
unclear. Once inside the host cell, chlamydiae reside in a membrane-bound
vacuole that can evade phagolysosomal fusion. The endosome is transported
to the distal region of the Golgi apparatus and incorporates host-derived
sphingolipids into the inclusion membrane (10,11). Thus it appears that
chlamydiae are able to intercept host vesicular traffic bound for the
plasma membrane to sequester lipids and possibly other host substances
synthesized in the Golgi. Subversion of host vesicular traffic may
represent a dual advantage for chlamydiae in obtaining materials from the
host for its metabolism as well as in modifying the inclusion membrane to
evade lysosomal fusion and immune detection.

Chlamydiae are considered energy parasites because they lack the enzymes of
the electron transport chain and thus require adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
and nutrient
                             [end of page 308]

resources from the host to fuel their metabolism and replication.
Chlamydiae are incapable of de novo nucleotide biosynthesis and are
dependent on host nucleotide pools (12). In spite of the successful
selection of various metabolic mutants of C. trachomatis, progress in
elucidating the host-parasite metabolic relationship has been hampered by
multiple salvage metabolic pathways in the host and the lack of a genetic
shuttle system for chlamydiae.

C. trachomatis

Epidemiology
Genital infections due to C. trachomatis are the most common sexually
transmitted diseases in many industrialized countries (3). Each year, an
estimated four million new cases occur in the United States and three
million in Europe. These infections present unique problems for public
health control programs because 50% to 70% of infections in women (and
perhaps men) are clinically silent. Unrecognized and untreated, the
bacteria may remain infectious in the host for months and be readily
transmitted to sex partners. Furthermore, most reported infections occur in
the 15- to 24-year-old age group. Young women with cervical chlamydial
infections are at risk for pelvic inflammatory disease, which can lead to
long-term reproductive sequelae such as chronic pelvic pain, ectopic
pregnancy, and tubal infertility. Babies born to infected mothers are also
at risk for conjunctivitis and pneumonia. The annual direct and indirect
costs of genital chlamydial infections in the United States are estimated
at $2.4 billion (4).

Control programs emphasizing early diagnosis, targeted screening, partner
notification, and effective treatment have led to a slow decline in the
incidence of genital chlamydial infection in countries where these programs
have been implemented (13). The true rate of decline may be higher than the
reported rate because of increased sensitivity of laboratory testing and
more widespread screening. In women, screening of chlamydial infection at
the time of Papanicolaou tests, prenatal visits, or attendance at family
planning or pregnancy counseling clinics have been effective. In
asymptomatic men, who are less likely to access care, asymptomatic
infection is not adequately addressed by current public health programs.

In contrast to genital chlamydial infection, trachoma is a household
disease that has disappeared in many parts of the world because of improved
living conditions and hygiene. In trachoma-endemic areas, severe disease
leading to scarring and blindness may be the result of frequent reinfection
or persistent infection in those whose immune system does not mount an
adequate response to clear the infection. For both ocular and genital
chlamydial infections, recent advances in diagnostic and screening
technology and single dose antimicrobial therapy will likely have a
significant impact on the efficacy of disease control programs and the
opportunity for eventual disease eradication.

Laboratory Diagnosis
Since curative antibiotic therapy for chlamydial infections is readily
available and inexpensive, early diagnosis is an essential component of
public health programs to control these infections. The goals of early
identification are to interrupt the chain of transmission in the community
and to prevent long-term sequelae. Isolation of the organism in cell
culture had been the traditional method for laboratory diagnosis and has
remained the method of choice for medicolegal specimens because of its
specificity. However, culture requires expensive equipment, technical
expertise, and stringent transport conditions to preserve specimen
viability; it also has a turnaround time of 2 to 3 days. Hence, in many
settings, culture has been replaced by antigen-detection methods, such as
enzyme immunoassays (EIA) and direct fluorescence assays (DFA), which have
less demanding transport requirements and can provide results on the same
day. EIAs are suitable for public health laboratories serving large
geographic areas because specimens are stable in transport under ambient
conditions and are inexpensive because they allow specimens to be processed
in batches by automated equipment. Assays are typically based on the
capture of the
                             [end of page 309]

chlamydial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) using monoclonal or polyclonal
antibodies linked to a solid-phase support. Early problems with low
specificity because of cross-reactivity between the chlamydial LPS and that
of other gram-negative bacteria have been largely overcome by confirmation
with DFA or a blocking antibody assay. With a lower detection limit of
10,000 elementary bodies, EIA lacks sensitivity as a screening assay,
especially for asymptomatic men (14,15). Nucleic acid-based hybridization
probe tests offer higher specificity but no substantial improvement on
sensitivity (15). Nucleic acid amplification tests based on polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), ligase chain reaction (LCR), and
transcription-mediated amplification technology are now commercially
available. The precision of nucleic acid hybridization and the rapid
amplification of a single gene target facilitated the design of diagnostic
tests with specificities in excess of 99% and lower detection limits of
1-10 EBs. In addition, these tests offer all the advantages of nonculture
tests in terms of ambient specimen transport, batching, automation, and
rapid processing time of 4 hours. Duplex testing for the simultaneous
detection of chlamydial and gonococcal DNA from a single specimen is also
commercially available in some countries.

A major advantage of the increased sensitivity of these molecular
amplification tests is that noninvasive specimens, such as urine, can be
used for testing. The ease of collection and the lack of sampling bias of
urine specimens make screening feasible in settings outside physicians'
offices. PCR assays on urethral or cervical swabs for the laboratory
diagnosis of genital chlamydial infection in symptomatic men and women show
sensitivities of 89% to 100% and specificities of 99% to 100% compared with
the traditional culture or PCR test, confirmed by a second PCR reaction
targeting a different gene (16-18). For urine specimens, PCR assays show
sensitivities of 87% to 100% for men and 92% for women and specificities of
96% to 100% for men and 95% for women (18-20). In a study of 447 women with
a prevalence of infection of 6%, the sensitivity of urine LCR was 96%
compared with 56% for cervical swab culture, 78% for cervical swab EIA, and
37% for urine EIA (21). For men in the same study, the sensitivity of urine
LCR was 96% compared with 68% for urine EIA, and 38% for urethral swab
culture. In a multicenter study of 2,132 women, cervical swab LCR showed a
sensitivity of 87% to 98% compared with a sensitivity of 52% to 92% for
culture (22). In LCR studies, a true positive was defined as culture
positive or LCR positive confirmed with DFA or another LCR assay with a
different DNA target. Thus it appears that molecular amplification
techniques for the detection of C. trachomatis in urine specimens from both
men and women are a substantial improvement over conventional diagnostic
and screening methods and will provide an important tool for decreasing the
reservoir of infection, especially in asymptomatic men.

In the diagnostic laboratory, molecular techniques present different
problems for specimen handling and interpretation of results than cell
culture or antigen detection (15). Inherent in the increased sensitivity of
these molecular techniques is the potential for false-positive results due
to cross contamination between specimens, and run-to-run contamination from
equipment, reagents, and supplies. These problems can be overcome by
observing stringent rules for specimen preparation (e.g., dedicated
equipment) and separating specimen processing and reagent preparation areas
to prevent contamination. Enzymatic or photochemical sterilization can be
used to eliminate run-to-run contamination. False-negative results may be
due to substances in specimens inhibitory to enzymes used for
amplification. Known inhibitors include phosphate ions, heparin, heme,
crystals in the urine specimens, and detergents used in specimen
processing. Internal controls are now commercially available to detect
false negatives.

Although molecular tests are more expensive than EIA, cost-effectiveness
studies should take into consideration the benefits of averting the
enormous costs of long-term reproductive sequelae in women with undetected
infections, adverse pregnancy outcomes, and HIV infection. Targeted
screening of women to detect cervical chlamydial infection decreases the
incidence
                             [end of page 310]

of symptomatic PID (23). Patients with genital gonococcal or chlamydial
infections are also at increased risk for human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) (24). Although the risk for HIV may be lower in patients with
chlamydial infection than in those with genital ulcer disease, the higher
prevalence of chlamydial infection in some populations means that the
population attributable risk for HIV may be substantially higher for
chlamydia. Shortening the duration of infectiousness by early diagnosis and
treatment could have a major impact on risk reduction for HIV infection. A
recent study showed that strengthening sexually transmitted disease control
through education, access to diagnosis, and treatment reduced the incidence
of HIV by 42% in study communities in Tanzania over 2 years (25).

Treatment
Azithromycin prescribed as a single oral 1-g dose is equivalent to the
traditional 7-day regimen of doxycycline for treating ocular and
uncomplicated genital chlamydial infections (26-28). Compared with
conventional therapy, azithromycin has excellent pharmacokinetic
characteristics, such as increased bioavailability; lower incidence of
gastrointestinal tract side effects; and increased concentration in mucus,
macrophages, and tissues with a half life of 5 to 7 days (29). These
characteristics allow for single dosing, which alleviates the problem of
patient noncompliance with multiday regimens. With single-dose therapy, the
potential for reinfection due to earlier resumption of sexual activity is a
concern. At present, there are limited data on the use of single-dose
therapy in adolescents, during pregnancy, and for syndromes such as PID,
cervicitis, and nongonococcal urethritis (30-33). Studies are needed to
determine if these regimens achieve clinical and microbiologic cure while
preserving fertility and preventing further tissue damage to the upper
genital tract.

Although the higher cost of azithromycin may be prohibitive for its use in
resource-limited settings, selective use in persons at high risk or in
those with a history of noncompliance may prove cost-effective. The cost of
retreatment as a result of noncompliance and the additional cost of contact
tracing can make single dose azithromycin more cost-effective than
doxycycline (34).

Pathogenesis
Interesting findings in three areas of C. trachomatis pathogenesis further
delineate the complex bacteria-host relationship in disease and may have
implications for vaccine design. These new observations include the
extensive but unexpected polymorphism of the major outer membrane protein
(MOMP), the evidence for genetic susceptibility to disease, and the
association of antibody response to the 60 kDa heat shock protein (CHSP60)
with the development of adverse sequelae following ocular and genital
infections.

Polymorphism of MOMP
The ecologic success of a pathogen is determined in part by its ability to
evade host defenses. With C. trachomatis, MOMP is a major target for
protective host immune responses, such as neutralizing antibodies and
possibly, protective T-cell responses (35,36). The basis for MOMP antigenic
variation is allelic polymorphism at the omp-1 locus, and immune selection
appears to be occurring in host populations frequently exposed to C.
trachomatis (37). Each variant apparently only infects hosts lacking
serovar-specific immunity to that variant, and the ecologic success of
chlamydiae may be due to their ability, under immune selection pressure, to
generate successive allelic variants (36). DNA sequence analyses of
isolates from different populations show that most MOMP variants are
results of single amino acid substitutions (37-39). Recombination of
sequences from MOMP during mixed infections may also have occurred.
Recombinant variants with mosaic sequences of MOMP from different strains
were especially frequent in persons with high rates of infection. MOMP
variants were also more frequently found in women with PID than in those
with lower genital tract infections, which suggests a relationship between
sequence variation in MOMP and more invasive disease (39). Clearly, the
extensive polymorphism of MOMP, the tempo for variation, and the mechanism
of immune selection have
                             [end of page 311]

important implications for vaccine design (35).

Genetic Susceptibility to Disease
HLA B27 has been associated with Reiter's syndrome following genital
chlamydial infection (40). Only a subset of infected persons appear to have
long-term complications after acute or repeated chlamydial infections. In a
study of 306 persons from trachoma-endemic communities in the Gambia, the
HLA class I antigen HLA-A28 was significantly more common in case-patients
than in age-, sex-, and location-matched controls (41). In particular, the
A*6802 allele was overrepresented among case-patients. It may be that
immunopathology is associated with HLA-A*6802 restricted cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte responses. The frequency of HLA class II alleles was similar
among cases and controls suggesting that, if class II restricted T-cell
responses are important in immunopathology, they were not targeted at
single epitopes. No individual HLA type was associated with protection from
scarring, which suggests that multiple or complex T-cell responses may be
involved in protective immunity. Susceptibility to chlamydial PID in a
study of sex workers in Nairobi, Kenya, has been associated with a HLA
class I allele, HLA A-31 (42). Studies are needed to determine whether
susceptibility to silent PID, ectopic pregnancy, and progression to tubal
factor infertility are associated with HLA class I restricted immune
responses.

Role of CHSP60 in Immunopathology
Antibody response to a 57 kDa chlamydial protein was initially observed
more frequently in women with tubal infertility than in controls (43). This
protein was subsequently identified as a heat shock protein of the GroEL
family of stress proteins. The association between antibody response to
CHSP60 and PID, ectopic pregnancy, tubal infertility, and trachoma (44-48)
has been documented. The risk factors associated with CHSP60 antibody
response are similar to those for chlamydial PID and include older age and
chronic or repeated infections. There appears to be genetic restriction for
the CHSP60 antibody response. In a study of trachoma in the Gambia, HLA
DRB1*0701 was positively correlated with CHSP60 response, while DRB1*0301
and DQB1*0501 were negatively associated (48). However, these alleles were
not associated with trachoma and may reflect linkage disequilibrium between
HLA class II alleles and polymorphic markers for other immune response
genes.

At present, it remains unclear whether antibody to CHSP60 is causally
involved in chlamydial immunopathogenesis or is merely a marker of
persistent chlamydial infection (35). Both may be true. In cells
persistently infected with C. trachomatis, the expression of CHSP60 is
normal, while other antigens, such as MOMP, are downregulated, thus
providing continued antigenic stimulation for the CHSP60 antibody response
observed in persons with long-term sequelae (49). T-cell responses to
chlamydial antigens, including CHSP60, were more depressed in persons with
trachoma than in those who recovered from infection without sequelae (50).
Persons with trachoma or reproductive sequelae have high levels of serum
antibody response to C. trachomatis. In guinea pigs and in gene knock-out
mice, both B- and T- cell responses have been important in immunity and
resolution of infection (51,52). Therefore, persons with long-term sequelae
may have predominantly Th2 responses, characterized by high levels of
B-cell response and inadequate T-cell responses that may not clear the
infection thus leading to chronic inflammation. Immunopathology may also be
the result of a hit-and-run mechanism in which immune response to CHSP60
breaks self-tolerance to the human HSP60 and leads to an autoimmune
reaction that results in tissue damage (35).

C. psittaci

Epidemiology
Human infections with C. psittaci are caused by occupational exposure to
infected birds or household handling of nasal discharge or fecal material
from pet birds. Birds can be healthy carriers of C. psittaci. Increased
shedding and susceptibility to disease occur under conditions of stress
such
                             [end of page 312]

as shipping, crowding, starvation, or egg laying. Person-to-person
transmission is rare but has been observed in outbreaks. In the C. psittaci
pandemic of 1929-30, infected birds from Argentina were shipped to
different parts of the world causing outbreaks of infection worldwide with
death rates of up to 40% (5). Since then C. psittaci has been isolated from
more than 130 species of birds. Thus, all avian species, including wild
birds, should be regarded as potential sources of zoonosis.

Reports of outbreaks of psittacosis in duck and turkey processing plants
show that, in spite of availability of medicated feed, diagnostic testing,
and screening of poultry, C. psittaci infections continue to be a public
health concern (53,54). High rates of chlamydial infection in household
cats and asymptomatic carriage of C. psittaci in cats from breeding
catteries raise the possibility that human C. psittaci infection from pets
other than birds may be underdiagnosed (6,7,55,56). Studies of animal and
cellular tropism of various strains within the species may give important
clues to the pathogenesis of C. psittaci infections.

Clinical Manifestations
Human infection caused by exposure to infected birds or poultry is
manifested as a flulike illness characterized by fever, chills, headache,
and less frequently, cough, myalgias, rash, arthralgia and joint swelling,
and atypical pneumonia in more severe cases. The incubation period is 6 to
19 days. Infections transmitted from ruminants are rare, but placentitis,
disseminated intravascular coagulation, and spontaneous abortion in women
exposed to infected sheep during lambing have been reported (56). Zoonoses
associated with exposure to ruminants are characterized by multiorgan
involvement often resulting in hepatic and renal dysfunction and
endocarditis. Human conjunctivitis, glomerulonephritis, and endocarditis
caused by C. psittaci from infected cats and pigeons have been reported
(55).

Diagnosis and Treatment
Serodiagnosis has been the method of choice for human C. psittaci
infections because culture is technically demanding and represents an
important biohazard. The complement fixation assay is genus specific. Its
interpretations should depend on clinical symptoms and patient history. The
microimmunofluorescence (MIF) assay can detect species-specific IgM or IgG
antibodies. Antigen detection methods, such as EIA, have been used, but
they are based on the capture of the genus-specific LPS. PCR assays are not
yet commercially available but can offer lower detection limits of 10 EBs
or less (57,58). Molecular techniques not only provide more sensitive and
rapid diagnosis than serology, but they also provide the opportunity for
fingerprinting strains. This is particularly useful in outbreak
investigations and for the confirmation of zoonotic transmission from
infected birds or animals.

The recommended treatment for C. psittaci infection is 250 mg of
tetracycline 4 times daily for 21 days. Although the death rate is low,
prolonged hospitalization may be required. Protracted recovery and high
incidence of relapse have also been noted.

C. pneumoniae

Epidemiology
C. pneumoniae is a common cause of acute respiratory tract infections and
accounts for 6% to 10% of community-acquired pneumonia (8). Infection is
usually mild or asymptomatic but can be severe, especially in the elderly,
probably as a result of underlying illness, impaired mucociliary clearance,
and immune senescence. Unlike C. psittaci, C. pneumoniae is spread by
person-to-person transmission by respiratory droplet and has an incubation
period of 7 to 21 days. Outbreaks of infection have been reported in
families, schools, military barracks, and nursing homes. Coinfection with
viruses (e.g., influenza and respiratory syncytial virus) and with bacteria
has been reported frequently. Seroepidemiologic studies show that most
primary infections occur during school age and the early teenage years;
among adults seroprevalence is 40% to 70%. Reinfections are common, and
serum antibodies do not appear to be protective.
                             [end of page 313]

Laboratory Diagnosis
Accurate and rapid laboratory diagnostic methods leading to improved
patient care, appropriate use of antimicrobial therapy, and better
understanding of the epidemiology of this emerging pathogen (59,60) are
needed. Culture is highly specific but is technically demanding often
requiring multiple passages over a period of weeks to show a positive
result. C. pneumoniae has been isolated from the nasopharynx of healthy
persons, but the rate of asymptomatic carriage in a normal population is
unknown (61).

Antigen detection tests, such as EIA and DFA, and molecular detection
methods, such as PCR assays, provide a rapid diagnosis without stringent
transport requirements. Monoclonal antibodies specific for C. pneumoniae
are now commercially available for DFA and for culture confirmation (62).
PCR assays have lower detection limits of 10 to 100 EBs (57,58,63-65). The
protocol developed by Tong and Sillis amplifies a target sequence conserved
between C. pneumoniae and C. psittaci and hence can detect DNA from either
pathogen in a single assay (57). A nested PCR procedure is used to
differentiate between the C. pneumoniae and C. psittaci amplicons. The
protocol of Rasmussen et al. amplifies a genus-specific target, followed by
species differentiation using restriction enzyme digestion (58). The
development of multiplex PCR assays containing primers specific for a panel
of respiratory pathogens will be useful.

The MIF assay is the standard method used for chlamydia serology today.
Ekman compared the performance of the complement fixation (CF), LPS-based
EIA, and MIF tests for the serodiagnosis of C. pneumoniae and C. psittaci
infections in an elderly population and found that the CF test has a
sensitivity of 10% compared with 88% and 72% for MIF and EIA, respectively
(66). IgM antibodies were only detected in 11% of the cases. IgM antibodies
are rarely produced in reinfections with C. pneumoniae. CF tests may be
useful in early initial infections as LPS antibodies are produced early in
infection. Serodiagnosis may be made by demonstrating a fourfold rise in CF
or EIA titer in paired sera taken a week apart, compared with the 3 weeks
or more that it takes by MIF to demonstrate seroconversion. Because
reinfections are common and LPS-based serologic tests are not useful in
reinfection, the MIF assay remains the most useful and specific tool for
the serodiagnosis of respiratory infections due to C. pneumoniae.

Treatment
The newer macrolides, clarithromycin and azithromycin, with longer tissue
half-life and concentration in mucus and macrophages and improved
bioavailability can potentially provide shorter and better-tolerated
regimens for the treatment of respiratory infections due to C. pneumoniae
than doxycycline or erythromycin, which have to be given for 2 to 3 weeks
to avoid relapse. They may also be preferred for empiric therapy as they
provide broader coverage than erythromycin against etiologic agents in
community-acquired pneumonia. The optimal duration of treatment for
respiratory infections due to C. pneumoniae needs to be determined since
studies with documented microbiologic cure are limited, and recurrence of
infection is common (67).

Association with Atherosclerosis
The association of C. pneumoniae infection with coronary heart disease and
acute myocardial infarction was first made on the basis of elevated IgG and
IgA antibodies and LPS containing immune complexes in 50% to 60% in
patients with coronary heart disease or acute myocardial infarction
compared with 7% to 12% in the controls. This study did not take into
account risk factors for heart disease such as smoking, hypertension, or
serum lipid levels. Subsequently, several cross-sectional studies involving
46 to 461 study participants have shown that a similar association of IgG
antibodies against C. pneumoniae with coronary artery disease and carotid
disease with adjusted odds ratios of 1.6 to 2.6 after controlling for known
risk factors (68-72). Electron microscopy, PCR, and immunochemical evidence
of C. pneumoniae in coronary arterial fatty streaks and atheromatous
plaques have also been described (72,73).
                             [end of page 314]

Two more recent studies reported equivocal findings. In one, C. pneumoniae
was detected in 79% of 90 coronary atherectomy specimens from symptomatic
patients by direct immunofluorescence and was confirmed by electron
microscopy. Only 4% of 24 control nonatherosclerotic coronary specimens
were positive for C. pneumoniae (74). The 24 control samples included 12
from heart transplant patients whose arteries were damaged, but not by
atherosclerosis. The absence of C. pneumoniae in these tissue samples
argues against its role as a passenger recruited to the site of injury in
macrophages. In the other study, C. pneumoniae was not detected in 58
coronary atheroma specimens by culture, PCR, or electron microscopy (75).
The seroprevalence of C. pneumoniae in 65 case-patients was not different
from that in 28 asymptomatic controls. In fact, IgG titers were higher in
controls than in case-patients. Nonetheless, data suggest that the
association of C. pneumoniae with atherosclerosis is consistent and
biologically plausible. Whether C. pneumoniae is causally involved or is a
bystander trapped in the atherogenic process is unclear.

The sustained IgA and IgG antibody levels against C. pneumoniae in persons
with atherosclerosis suggest that chronic infection may be frequent after
infection. The site of colonization for a chronic C. pneumoniae infection
may be in the alveolar macrophages of the lung. Thus the initial event in
atherogenesis may be the formation of the fatty streak. Fatty streaks
consist of lipid-laden macrophages derived from blood monocytes and T
lymphocytes attracted to the arterial subintima. Conversion of the fatty
streak to atheroma depends on many factors, e.g., the proliferation and
differentiation of smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts. Chronic infection
with C. pneumoniae may result from organisms harbored in macrophages
trapped in the arterial wall. Growth of C. pneumoniae in endothelial,
smooth muscle cells, and macrophages from peripheral blood monocytes has
been reported (76). Injured blood vessels initiate events that promote
thrombosis and platelet adhesion at the site of injury. These events in
turn promote atherosclerosis. Tissue injury through C. pneumoniae-specific
circulating immune complexes in patients with chronic heart disease may be
an alternate mechanism or compounding atherogenesis. The idea that an
infectious agent is involved in the atherogenic process is not new, but the
role of C. pneumoniae in this process needs to be defined.

Association with Asthma
The prevalence of asthma, an important chronic respiratory disorder, has
been steadily increasing. Viral and Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections have
been implicated in exacerbating the disease. The first observations on the
association of C. pneumoniae infection with the exacerbation of asthma were
made in 1986 when wheezing was associated with acute bronchitis due to
pneumoniae infection (8,77). Subsequent studies showed that exacerbation of
asthma due to C. pneumoniae infection may occur in 1% to 11% of respiratory
infections in adults as well as children. The mechanism underlying the
association is unclear. Preliminary results in animal models suggest that
C. pneumoniae can produce persistent infection and cause pulmonary
inflammation, and production of chlamydia-specific IgE antibodies in
children with reactive airway disease has been demonstrated (78). A
possible scenario for this association is an antigen-specific allergic
reaction with the release of pulmonary inflammatory mediators and
recruitment of inflammatory cells to the airways, causing airway epithelial
damage. Activated T lymphocytes and cytokines appear to play a critical
role as mediators of persistent inflammation in asthma. IL-4 is essential
for B lymphocytes class switching from IgG to IgE. In vitro human IgE
synthesis is reciprocally regulated by IL-4 and interferon-gamma. Thus
cytokines from a Th2 response to infection would facilitate and promote IgE
production. Immunotherapy or glucocorticoid therapy targeting CD4+ T cells
may decrease the proinflammatory role of these cells and alleviate symptoms
of asthma. The role of persistent infection in the pathogenesis of asthma
merits further study because, unlike
                             [end of page 315]

viral infections, C. pneumoniae infections can be eradicated through
appropriate antimicrobial therapy.

The hallmark of chlamydial infection is that most persons infected have
mild to no apparent clinical disease and some have severe disease.
Asymptomatic infection not only creates a problem in detecting cases for
disease control programs but also contributes to the development of
long-term adverse sequelae, such as scarring trachoma from ocular C.
trachomatis infection, pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy, and
tubal factor infertility from genital C. trachomatis infection. The recent
availability of effective single dose oral antimicrobial therapy and
sensitive molecular amplification tests that allow the use of noninvasive
specimens for diagnosis and screening is expected to have a major impact in
reducing the prevalence of disease in the next decade. New information from
cell biology as well as data from observing the interaction of chlamydiae
with the host in terms of metabolic requirements and immune evasion
strategies offer clues about the pathogenesis of chlamydia infections and
may eventually lead to an effective vaccine. Sporadic outbreaks of
psittacosis continue to be reported despite the use of medicated feed and
the screening of poultry. Recent reports of C. psittaci in cats from
breeding catteries illustrate the potential of zoonotic diseases
transmissible to humans from pets other than birds. Two new species of
chlamydiae, C. pneumoniae and C. pecorum, were desig-nated in 1989 and
1992, respectively. Clinical manifestations associated with C. pneumoniae
infection continue to emerge. Possible links to chronic conditions, such as
atherosclerosis and asthma remain to be elucidated. With the recent
discovery of the involvement of infectious agents in other chronic
conditions, it seems reasonable to apply molecular tools for chlamydial
detection to identify their potential involvement in other etiologically
undefined chronic inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel
disease and rheumatoid arthritis.

    Dr. Peeling is a research scientist and chief of the Division of
    Chlamydial and Mycoplasma Diseases at the Laboratory Centre for
    Disease Control, Health Canada. She is interested in the diagnosis
    and pathogenesis of chlamydial infections with particular emphasis
    on the development, risk assessment, and possible prevention of
    adverse ocular and reproductive sequelae in human chlamydial
    infections.

    Dr. Brunham is professor and head of the Department of Medical
    Microbiology at the University of Manitoba. He has a long standing
    interest in the immunology of chlamydial infections, and his
    current research focus is on vaccine development.

Address for correspondence: Rosanna W. Peeling, LCDC Chlamydia Laboratory,
Health Sciences Centre MS 673C, 820 Sherbrook St., Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada R3A 1R9; fax: 204-787-4699; e-mail: rosanna_peeling@isdtcp3.hwc.ca.

References

  1. Weisburg WG, Hatch TT, Woese CR. Eubacterial origin of chlamydiae. J
     Bacteriol 1986;167:570-4.
  2. Dawson CR, Jones BR, Tarizzo ML. Guide to trachoma control in
     programmes for the prevention of blindness. Geneva: World Health
     Organization, 1981.
  3. Sexually Transmitted Diseases. World Health Organization Press Release
     WHO/64, 25 August 1995.
  4. Washington A, Johnson RE, Sanders L Jr. Chlamydia trachomatis
     infection in the United States: what are they costing us? JAMA
     1987;257:2070-2.
  5. Schachter J, Dawson CR. Psittacosis. Human Chlamydial Infections.
     Littleton, MA: PSG Publishing Co., 1978.
  6. Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Stevens JB, English RV, Davidson MG. Clinical and
     laboratory findings in chronic conjunctivitis in cats: 91 cases
     (1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:834-7.
  7. Pointon AM, Nicholls JM, Neville S, Allanson M, Coles C, Lawrence D.
     Chlamydia infection among breeding catteries in south Australia.
     Australian Veterinary Practitioner 1991;21:58-63.
  8. Grayston JT. Infections caused by Chlamydia pneumoniae strain TWAR.
     Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:757-63.
  9. Stephens RS. Molecular mimicry and Chlamydia trachomatis infection of
     eucaryotic cells. Trends Microbiol 1994;2:99-101.
 10. Hackstadt T, Scidmore MA, Rocky DD. Lipid metabolism in Chlamydia
     trachomatis-infected cells: directed trafficking of Golgi-derived
     sphingolipids to the chlamydial inclusion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
     1995;92:4877-81.
 11. Hackstadt T, Rocky DD, Heinzen RA, Sidmore MA. Chlamydia trachomatis
     interrupts an exocytic pathway to acquire endogenously synthesized
     sphingomyelin in transit from the Golgi apparatus to the plasma
     membrane. EMBO J 1996;15:964-77.
 12. McClarty G. Chlamydiae and the biochemistry of intracellular
     parasitism. Trends Microbiol 1994;2:157-64.
                                [end of page 316]

 13. Peeling RW. Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae: Pathogens
     in retreat? Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases 1995;8:26-34.
 14. Lin JSL, Jones WE, Yan L, Wirthwein KA, Flaherty EE, Haivanis RM, et
     al. Underdiagnosis of Chlamydia trachomatis infection: diagnostic
     limitations in patients with low-level infection. Sex Transm Dis
     1992;19:259-65.
 15. Peeling RW, Brunham RC. Molecular techniques for the laboratory
     identification of Chlamydia trachomatis. Journal of the International
     Federation of Clinical Chemistry 1994;6:78-82.
 16. Bauwens JE, Clark AM, Stamm WE. Diagnosis of Chlamydia trachomatis
     endocervical infections by a commercial polymerase chain reaction
     assay. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:3023-7.
 17. de Barbeyrac B, Pellet I. Dutilh B, Bebear C, Dumon B, Geniaux M, et
     al. Evaluation of the Ampicor Chlamydia trachomatis test versus
     culture in genital samples in various prevalence populations.
     Genitorurin Med 1994;70:162-6.
 18. Wisenfeld HC, Uhrin M, Dixon BW, Sweet RL. Diagnosis of male Chlamydia
     trachomatis urethritis by polymerase chain reaction. Sex Transm Dis
     1994;21:268-71.
 19. Jaschek G, Gaydos CA, Welsh L, Quinn TC. Direct detection of Chlamydia
     trachomatis in urine specimens from symptomatic and asymptomatic men
     by using a rapid polymerase chain reaction assay. J Clin Microbiol
     1993;31:1209-12.
 20. Toye B, Peeling RW, Jessamine P, Claman P, Gemmill I. Diagnosis of
     Chlamydia trachomatis infections in asymptomatic men and women by PCR
     assay. J Clin Microbiol 1996;34:1396-400.
 21. Chernesky MA, Jang D, Lee H, Hu H, Sellors J, Tomazic-Allen SJ, et al.
     Diagnosis of Chlamydia trachomatis infections in men and women by
     testing first-void urine by ligase chain reaction. J Clin Microbiol
     1994;32:2682-5.
 22. Schachter J, Stamm WE, Quinn TC, Andrews WW, Burczak JD, Lee H. Ligase
     chain reaction to detect Chlamydia trachomatis infection of the
     cervix. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:2540-3.
 23. Scholes D, Stergachis A, Heidrich FE, Andrilla HA, Holmes KK, Stamm
     WE. Selective screening for chlamydia reduces the incidence of pelvic
     inflammatory disease: results from a randomised intervention trial. J
     Infect Dis 1996 (in press).
 24. Cameron DW, Simonsen JN, D'Costa LJ, Ronald AR, Maitha GM, Gakinya MN,
     et al. Female to male transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
     type 1: risk factors for seroconversion in men. Lancet 1989;ii:403-7.
 25. Grosskurth H, Mosha F, Todd J, Mwijarubi E, Klokke A, Senkoro K, et
     al. Impact of improved treatment of sexually transmitted diseases on
     HIV infection in rural Tanzania: randomised controlled trial. Lancet
     1995:346:530-6.
 26. Martin DH, Mroczkowski TF, Dalu ZA, McCarty J, Jones RB, Hopkins SJ,
     et al. A controlled trial of a single dose of azithromycin for the
     treatment of chlamydial urethritis and cervicitis. N Engl J Med
     1992;327:921-5.
 27. Bailey RL, Arullendran P, Whittle HC, Mabey DCW. Randomised controlled
     trial of single-dose azithromycin in the treatment of trachoma. Lancet
     1993;342:453-6.
 28. Ossewaarde JM, Plantema FHF, Rieffe M, Nawrocki RP, de Vries A, van
     Loon AM. Efficacy of single-dose azithromycin versus doxycycline in
     the treatment of cervical infections caused by Chlamydia trachomatis.
     Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1992;11:693-7.
 29. Worm A-M, Osterlind A. Azithromycin levels in cervical mucus and
     plasma after a single 1.0 g oral dose for chlamydia cervicitis.
     Genitourin Med 1995;71:244-6.
 30. Hammerschlag MR, Golden NH, Oh MK, Gelling M, Sturdevant M, Pernell
     PR, et al. Single dose of azithromycin for the treatment of genital
     chlamydial infections in adolescents. J Pediatr 1993;122:961-5.
 31. Bush MR, Rosa C. Azithromycin and erythromycin in the treatment of
     cervical chlamydial infection during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
     1994;84:61-3.
 32. Lauharanta J, Saarinen K, Mustonen M-T, Happonen H-P. Single-dose oral
     azithromycin versus seven-day doxycycline in the treatment of
     non-gonococcal urethritis in males. J Antimicrob Chemother
     1993;31:177-83.
 33. Lister PJ, Balechandran T, Ridgway GL, Robinson JA. Comparison of
     azithromycin and doxycycline in the treatment of non-gonococcal
     urethritis in men. J Antimicrob Chemother 1993;31:185-92.
 34. Magid D, Douglas JM, Schwartz JS. Doxycycline compared with
     azithromycin for treating women with genital Chlamydia trachomatis
     infections: an incremental cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern
     Med 1996;124:389-99.
 35. Brunham RC, Peeling RW. Chlamydia trachomatis antigens: role in
     immunity and pathogenesis. Infect Agents Dis 1994;3:218-33.
 36. Brunham RC, Plummer F, Stephens RS. Bacterial antigenic variation,
     host immune response and pathogen-host co-evolution. Infect Immun
     1993;61:2273-6.
 37. Brunham R, Yang C, Maclean I, Kimani J, Maitha G, Plummer F. Chlamydia
     trachomatis from individuals in a sexually transmitted disease core
     group exhibit frequence sequence variation in the major outer membrane
     protein (omp1) gene. J Clin Invest 1994;94:458-63.
 38. Hayes LJ, Bailey RL, Mabey DCW, Clarke IN, Pickett MA, Watt PJ, et al.
     Genotyping of Chlamydia trachomatis from a trachoma endemic village in
     the Gambia by a nested polymerase chain reaction: identification of
     strain variants. J Infect Dis 1992;166:1173-7.
                                [end of page 317]

 39. Dean D, Schachter J, Dawson CR, Stephens RS. Comparison of the major
     outer membrane protein variant sequence regions of B/Ba isolates: a
     molecular epidemiologic approach to Chlamydia trachomatis infections.
     J Infect Dis 1992;166:383-92.
 40. Schachter J, Dawson CR. Reiter's Syndrome. Human Chlamydial
     Infections. Littleton, MA: PSG Publishing Co., 1978.
 41. Conway DJ, Holland MJ, Campbell AE, Bailey RL, Krausa P, Peeling RW,
     et al. HLA class I and class II polymorphism and trachomatous scarring
     in a chlamydia trachomatis-endemic population. J Infect Dis
     1996;174:643-6.
 42. Kimani J, Maclean IW, Bwayo JJ, MacDonald K, Oyugi J, Maitha GM, et
     al. Risk factors for Chlamydia trachomatis pelvic inflammatory disease
     among sex workers in Nairobi, Kenya. J Infect Dis 1996;173:1437-44.
 43. Brunham RC, Maclean IW, Binns B, Peeling RW. Chlamydia trachomatis:
     its role in tubal infertility. J Infect Dis 1985;152:1275-82.
 44. Wagar EA, Schachter J, Bavoil P, Stephens RS. Differential human
     serologic response to two 60,000 molecular weight Chlamydia
     trachomatis antigens. J Infect Dis 1990;162:922-7.
 45. Brunham RC, Peeling R, Maclean I, Kosseim ML, Paraskevas M. Chlamydia
     trachomatis-associated ectopic pregnancy:serologic and histologic
     correlates. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1076-81.
 46. Toye B, Laferriere C, Claman P, Jessamine P, Peeling R. Association
     between antibody to the chlamydial heat shock protein and tubal
     infertility. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1236-40.
 47. Arno JN, Yuan Y, Cleary RE, Morrison RP. Serologic responses of
     infertile women to the 60-kd chlamydial heat shock protein. Fertil
     Steril 1995;64:730-5.
 48. Peeling RW, Bailey RL, Conway D, Holland MJ, Dillon E, Mabey DCW.
     Antibody response to the chlamydial heat shock protein 60 is
     associated with scarring trachoma. 96th American Society for
     Microbiology meeting, New Orleans, May 1996. Abstract #2871.
 49. Beatty WL, Byrne GI, Morrison RP. Morphologic and antigenic
     characterization of interferon gamma mediated persistent Chlamydia
     trachomatis infection in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
     1993;90:3998-4002.
 50. Holland MJ, Bailey RL, Hayes LJ, Whittle HC, Mabey DCW. Conjunctival
     scarring in trachoma is associated with depressed cell-mediated immune
     responses to chlamydial antigens. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1528-31.
 51. Morrison RP, Feilzer K, Tumas DB. Gene knock-out mice establish a
     primary role for major histocompatibility complex class II-restricted
     responses in Chlamydia trachomatis genital tract infection. Infect
     Immun 1995;63:4661-8.
 52. Igietseme JU, Magee DM, Williams DM, Rank RG. Role for CD8+ T cells in
     antichlamydial immunity defined by chlamydia-specific T-lymhocyte
     clones. Infect Immun 1994;62:5195-7.
 53. Hinton DG, Shipley A, Galvim JW, Harkin JT, Brunton RA. Chlamydiosis
     in workers at a duck farm and processing plant. Aust Vet J
     1993;70:174-6.
 54. Hedberg K, White KE, Forfang JC, Korlath JA, Friendshuh, Hedberg CW,
     et al. An outbreak of psittacosis in Minnesota turkey industry
     workers: implications for modes of transmission and control. Am J
     Epidemiol 1989;130:569-77.
 55. Hadley KM, Carrington D, Frew CE, Gibson AAM, Hislop WS. Ovine
     chlamydiosis in an abattoir worker. J Infect Dis 1992;25:105-9.
 56. Regan RJ, Dathan JRE, Treharne JD. Infective endocarditis with
     glomerulonephritis associated with cat chlamydia (C. psittaci)
     infection. British Heart Journal 1979;42:349-52.
 57. Tong CYW, Sillis M. Detection of Chlamydia pneumoniae and Chlamydia
     psittaci in sputum samples by PCR. J Clin Pathol 1993;46:313-7.
 58. Rasmussen SJ, Douglas FP, Timms P. PCR detection and differentiation
     of Chlamydia pneumoniae, Chlamydia psittaci and Chlamydia trachomatis.
     Mol Cell Probes 1992;6:389-94.
 59. Saikku P. Diagnosis of acute and chronic Chlamydia pneumoniae
     infections. In: Orfila J, et al., editors. Chlamydial Infections.
     Bologna: Societa Editrice Esculapio, 1994.
 60. Peeling RW. Laboratory diagnosis of Chlamydia pneumoniae infections.
     Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases 1995;6:198-203.
 61. Gnarpe J, Gnarpe H, Sundelof B. Endemic prevalence of Chlamydia
     pneumoniae in subjectively healthy persons. Scand J Infect Dis
     1991;23:387-8.
 62. Montalban GS, Roblin PM, Hammerschlag MR. Performance of three
     commercially available monoclonal reagents for confirmation of
     Chlamydia pneumoniae in cell culture. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:1406-7.
 63. Campbell LA, Melgosa MP, Hamilton DJ, Kuo C-C, Grayston JT. Detection
     of Chlamydia pneumoniae by polymerase chain reaction. J Clin Microbiol
     1992;30:434-9.
 64. Gaydos CA, Roblin PM, Hammerschlag MR, Hyman CL, Eiden JJ, Schacter J,
     et al. Diagnostic utility of PCR-Enzyme Immunoassay, culture, and
     serology for the detection of Chlamydia pneumoniae in symptomatic and
     asymptomatic patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:903-5.
 65. Black CM, Fields PI, Messmer TO, Berdal BP. Detection of Chlamydia
     pneumoniae in clinical specimens by polymerase chain reaction using
     nested primers. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1994;13:752-6.
 66. Ekman MR, Leinonen M, Syrjala H, Linnanmaki E, Kujala P, Saikku P.
     Evaluation of serological methods in the diagnosis of Chlamydia
     pneumoniae during an epidemic in Finland. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect
     Dis 1993;12:756-60.
                                [end of page 318]

 67. Roblin P, Montalban G, Hammerschlag MR. Susceptibilities to
     clarithromycin and erythromycin of isolates of Chlamydia pneumoniae
     from children with pneumonia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
     1994;38:1588-9.
 68. Grayston JT, Thom DH, Kuo C-C, Campbell LA, Wang S-P. Chlamydia
     pneumoniae (TWAR) and atherosclerosis. In: Orfila J, Byrne G,
     Chernesky MA, et al, editors. Chlamydial Infections. Bologna: Societa
     Editrice Esculapio, 1994.
 69. Saikku P, Leinonen M, Tenkanen L, Linnanmaki E, Ekman M-R, Manninen V,
     et al. Chronic Chlamydia pneumoniae Infection as a Risk Factor for
     Coronary Heart Disease in the Helsinki Heart Study. Ann Intern Med
     1992;116:273-8.
 70. Thom D, Grayston JT, Siscovick D, Wang S-P, Weiss N, Daling J.
     Association of Prior Infection With Chlamydia pneumoniae and
     Angiographically Demonstrated Coronary Artery Disease. JAMA
     1992;268:68-72.
 71. Melnick S, Shahar E, Folsom A, Grayston JT, Sorlie P, Wang S-P, et al.
     Past Infection by Chlamydia pneumoniae Strain TWAR and Asymptomatic
     Carotid Atherosclerosis. Am J Med 1993;95:499-504.
 72. Shor A, Kuo CC, Patton D. Detection of Chlamydia pneumoniae in
     coronary arterial fatty streaks and atheromatous plaques. S Afr Med J
     1992;82:158-61.
 73. Kuo CC, Shor A, Campbell L, Fukushi H, Patton D, Grayston JT.
     Demonstration of Chlamydia pneumoniae in Atherosclerotic Lesions of
     Coronary Arteries. J Infect Dis 1993;167:841-9.
 74. Muhlestein JB, Hammond E, Carlquist JF, Radicke E, Thomson MJ,
     Karagounis LA, et al. Increased incidence of Chlamydia species within
     the coronoary arteries of patients with symptomatic atherosclerotic
     versus other forms of cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol
     1996;27:1555-61.
 75. Weiss SM, Roblin PM, Gaydos C, Cummings P, Patton D, Schulhoff N, et
     al. Failure to detect Chlamydia pneumoniae in coronary atheromas of
     patients undergoing atherectomy. J Infect Dis 1996;173:957-62.
 76. Godzik K, O'Brien E, Wang S-K, Kuo CC. In Vitro Susceptibility of
     Human Vascular Wall Cells to Infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae. J
     Clin Microbiol 1995;33:2411-4.
 77. Hahn DL, Dodge RW, Golubjatnikov R. Association of Chlamydia
     pneumoniae (TWAR) infection with wheezing, asthmatic bronchitis and
     adult-onset asthma. JAMA 1991,266:225-30.
 78. Emre U, Sokolovskaya N, Roblin PM, Schachter J, Hammerschlag M.
     Detection of anti-Chlamydia pneumoniae IgE in children with reactive
     airway disease. J Infect Dis 1995;148:727-32.

                             [end of page 319]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------


