[Front Cover]
Federal Communications Commission

Section 504
Programs & Activities
Accessibility
Handbook

Federal Communications Commission
Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau
445 12th St. S.W.
Washington, DC 20554
1-888-CALL-FCC (1-888-225-5322)
TTY: 1-888-TELL-FCC (1-888-835-5322)
www.fcc.gov/cgb/



[Page i]
TABLE OF CONTENTS



I.  INTRODUCTION
  1.  SECTION 504 HANDBOOK  2
  2.  BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ACCESS  3
  3.  SECTION 504 OF THE REHABILITATION ACT  4
  4.  DISABILITY RIGHTS MOVEMENT  5

II.  ACCESSIBILITY AND THE FCC
  1.  TYPES OF ACCESS REQUESTED  8
    ACCESS FOR PEOPLE WITH MOBILITY IMPAIRMENTS  8
    ACCESS FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE BLIND OR HAVE LOW VISION  8
    ACCESS FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE DEAF OR HARD OF HEARING  9
    ACCESS FOR PEOPLE WITH SPEECH DISABILITIES  10
    ACCESS FOR PEOPLE WITH OTHER DISABILITIES  11
  2.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR PHYSICAL ACCESS  12
    BUILDINGS / ROOMS / HALLWAYS  12
  3.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR INFORMATION ACCESS  13
    FORMS / PUBLIC INFORMATION / COMPLAINTS / MEDIA, ETC.  13
  4.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR STAFF ACTIVITIES  15
    OFFICE PARTIES / HOLIDAY CELEBRATIONS / FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED EMPLOYEE 
    ORGANIZATIONS / ETC.  15 
  5.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR SAFETY  16
    BUILDING EVACUATION  16
    SECURITY ISSUES  16
  6.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONTRACTING AND ACQUISITIONS  18
    CONTRACTING / ACQUISITIONS / SERVICES / EQUIPMENT, ETC.  18


[Page ii]
III.  MEETINGS / DOCUMENTS / TRAINING
  1.  INTERNAL FCC MEETINGS  21
    IF YOUR MEETING IS OPEN TO ALL FCC STAFF  21
      AND is scheduled in the Commission Meeting Room  21
    IF YOUR MEETING IS OPEN TO ALL FCC STAFF  22
      AND is scheduled for a location other than the Commission Meeting Room  22
    IF YOUR MEETING IS FOR A LIMITED FCC AUDIENCE (DIVISION MEETING, 
    INTERNAL TASK FORCE, COMMITTEE, ETC.)  23 
      AND you know the attendees  23
      AND you DON'T know the attendees  23
    IF YOUR MEETING REQUIRES PRE-REGISTRATION  24
  2.  MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES  25
    IF YOUR MEETING IS A COMMISSION OPEN MEETING  25
    IF YOUR MEETING IS A PUBLIC MEETING WITH NO PRE-REGISTRATION REQUIRED  26
    IF YOUR MEETING IS OPEN TO A LIMITED PUBLIC AUDIENCE  27
      AND you know the attendees  27
      AND you DON'T know the attendees  27
    IF YOUR MEETING FOCUSES ON ISSUES YOU EXPECT TO BE OF INTEREST TO PEOPLE 
    WITH DISABILITIES  28
    IF YOUR MEETING REQUIRES PRE-REGISTRATION  30
  3.  DISSEMINATING NEWS RELEASES, PUBLIC NOTICES, TEXTS, AND OTHER DOCUMENTS  
32 
  4.  HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS  33
    OPENING ANNOUNCEMENTS  33
    MEETING MODERATORS  33
    AUDIO AND VISUAL MEDIA  36
      Presenters with printed handouts or audio/visual media  36
        AND people with disabilities are expected  36
      Presenters with printed handouts or audio/visual media  37
        AND it is unknown if people with disabilities will attend  37
    IF YOU ARE INVITED TO SPEAK AT A NON-FCC EVENT  38
      AND have handouts or audio/visual presentations  38
        If the hosts HAVE MADE ARRANGEMENTS for accommodations  38
        If the hosts HAVE NOT MADE ARRANGEMENTS for accommodations or do not 
        know if people with disabilities plan to attend  38
  5.  AUDIO-VISUAL MEDIA PRODUCED OR OWNED BY THE COMMISSION  40
    VIDEO FORMATS (VIDEOTAPE, CD, DVD, ETC.)  40
      Captioning  40
      Video description  40
    AUDIO RECORDINGS  40
    TO ARRANGE FOR CAPTIONING OR VIDEO DESCRIPTION OR TO DISCUSS YOUR MEDIA 
    OPTIONS  40
  6.  TRAINING  41
    FCC TRAINING  41
    FCC UNIVERSITY  41
    FCC CONTRACTED TRAINING  42
    EXTERNAL TRAINING  42

[Page iii]
IV.  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCEDURES
  1.  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUESTS  45
    IF YOU RECEIVE A REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS  45
  2.  FCC504@FCC.GOV  47
    PURPOSE  47
    WHO CHECKS THIS MAILBOX?  47
  3.  TTY ACCESS  48
    DISTRIBUTION OF TTYS WITHIN THE COMMISSION - MINIMUM STANDARDS  48
    TTY TELEPHONE NUMBERS  48
    TTY ASSISTANCE  48
    TELECOMMUNICATIONS RELAY SERVICE (TRS)  49
      TTY calls  49
      VCO (Voice Carry Over)  49
      HCO (Hearing Carry Over)  50
      STS (Speech to Speech)  50
      IP Relay  50
      VRS (Video Relay Service)  50
      Spanish Relay Service  51
  4.  DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED IN ALTERNATE FORMATS  52
    WHERE SHOULD THEY BE SENT?  52
  5.  CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM AUDIO RECORDINGS  53
    WHY TRANSCRIBE AUDIO RECORDINGS?  53
    WHO COORDINATES THE TRANSCRIPTION PROCESS?  53
    WHAT TYPES OF AUDIO RECORDINGS ARE ACCEPTED FOR TRANSCRIPTION?  53
    WHO SHOULD CREATE THE TRANSCRIPTS?  54
    TRANSCRIPTION PROCESS  54
    TRANSCRIPT REVIEW  55
    TRANSCRIPT FORMAT  55
    FINAL DISPOSITION  55
  6.  CREATING IN-HOUSE WRITTEN TRANSCRIPTS FROM BRAILLE  56
    WHY TRANSCRIBE BRAILLE?  56
    WHO COORDINATES THE TRANSCRIPTION PROCESS?  56
    WHAT TYPES OF BRAILLE ARE ACCEPTED FOR TRANSCRIPTION?  56
    WHO SHOULD CREATE THE TRANSCRIPTS?  56
    TRANSCRIPTION PROCESS  57
    TRANSCRIPT REVIEW  57
    TRANSCRIPT FORMAT  57
    FINAL DISPOSITION  58

[Page iv]
  7.  CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM SIGN LANGUAGE VIDEO-RECORDINGS  59
    WHY TRANSCRIBE SIGN LANGUAGE VIDEO RECORDINGS?  59
    WHO COORDINATES THE TRANSLATION / TRANSCRIPTION PROCESS?  59
    WHAT VISUAL PRESENTATIONS WILL BE ACCEPTED FOR TRANSLATION?  59
    WHO SHOULD CREATE THE TRANSCRIPTS?  59
    TRANSCRIPTION PROCESS  60
    TRANSLATION PROCESS  60
    TRANSLATION REVIEW  62  
    TRANSLATION FORMAT  62
    FINAL DISPOSITION  62

V.  DISABILITY PRIMER
  1.  DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS  64
    REHABILITATION ACT, SECTION 504  64
    REHABILITATION ACT  66
      Section 501  66
      Section 503  66
      Section 508  66
    AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA)  67
      ADA Title I: Employment  67
      ADA Title II: State and Local Government Activities  67
      ADA Title II: Public Transportation  68
      ADA Title III: Public Accommodations  69
      ADA Title IV: Telecommunications Relay Services  69
    ARCHITECTURAL BARRIERS ACT  70
    TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT  70
      Sections 255 and 251  70
      Section 713  71
    TELEVISION DECODER CIRCUITRY ACT  71
    HEARING AID COMPATIBILITY ACT  71
  2. DISABILITY STATISTICS  73
  3. DISABILITY TERMINOLOGY  74
  4.  DISABILITY ETIQUETTE  76
    GENERAL ETIQUETTE  76
    SENSITIVITY TO BLINDNESS AND VISUAL IMPAIRMENTS  78
    INTERACTING WITH PEOPLE WHO HAVE SPEECH DISABILITIES  80
  5.  SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS  82
    WHEN USING AN INTERPRETER  82
      Study of fatigue confirms need for working in teams  83
      Code of Ethics (Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf)  84
  6.  ASSISTIVE LISTENING DEVICES  86
    INFRARED SYSTEMS  86
    FM SYSTEMS  86
    INDUCTIVE OR AUDIO LOOP SYSTEMS  87

[Page v]
  7.  CART (COMMUNICATION ACCESS REALTIME TRANSLATION)  88
    WHAT IS IT?  88
    HOW IT'S DONE  88
    CERTIFICATION  88
  8.  CAPTIONING  89
    WHAT IS CAPTIONING?  89
    CAPTION STYLES  90
    HOW ARE REALTIME [LIVE] CAPTIONS GENERATED?  90
    METHODS OF CAPTIONING  91
  9.  BRAILLE  93
    WHAT IS BRAILLE?  93
    WHAT DOES BRAILLE LOOK LIKE?  93
    HOW WAS BRAILLE INVENTED?  93
    HOW IS BRAILLE WRITTEN?  93
  10.  VIDEO DESCRIPTION  96
  11.  DISABILITY ACCESS SYMBOLS  98
    ACCESS TO LOW VISION  98
    ACCESSIBILITY SYMBOL  98
    ACCESSIBLE PRINT  98
    ASSISTIVE LISTENING SYSTEMS  98
    AUDIO DESCRIPTION (VIDEO DESCRIPTION)  99
    BRAILLE SYMBOL  99
    CLOSED CAPTIONING  99
    SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETATION  100
    TTY (TELETYPEWRITER)  100
    VOLUME CONTROL TELEPHONE  100

APPENDIX A  103
  AMENDMENT OF PART 1, SUBPART N OF THE COMMISSION'S RULES CONCERNING 
  NON-DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY IN THE COMMISSION'S PROGRAMS 
  AND ACTIVITIES  103

APPENDIX B  119
  BRAILLE SAMPLE PAGE  119

INDEX  122

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, (Pub.L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394, 29 U.S.C. 794, 
as amended by the Rehabilitation Act Amandments of 1974, Pub.L. 93-516, 88 
Stat. 1617, and the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental 
Disabilities Amendments of 1978, Pub.L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955, and the 
Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986, sec. 103(d), Pub.L. 99-506, 100 Stat. 
1810) creates specific causes of action for persons who are aggrieved by 
discriminatory treatment as defined in the Act.  This Handbook is intended to 
guide implementation of the Federal Communications Commission's 
responsibilities under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act.  It is for 
internal staff use and public information only, and is not intended to create 
any rights, responsibilities, or independent cause of action against the 
Federal Government.




[Page 1]
I. INTRODUCTION

[Page 2]
1.  SECTION 504 HANDBOOK

The Federal Communications Commission Section 504 Programs & Activities 
Accessibility Handbook (Section 504 Handbook) is a collection of guidelines, 
information, and procedures to ensure that the Commission is accessible to 
individuals with disabilities.  The content of this handbook is designed to 
assist Commission personnel in their efforts to provide such accessbility. 

The FCC is committed to fostering an attitude of inclusion and a commitment to 
access that will permeate all Commission programs and activities.  While 
certain aspects of providing access for people with disabilities can be 
clearly visible (sign language interpreters, ramps, and braille documents), 
other aspects may easily pass unnoticed (descriptions of humorous decorations 
on birthday cakes to colleagues who are blind so they can join in the fun, or 
remembering to stand facing co-workers who are hard of hearing so that they 
can speechread/lipread *1 more easily). 

It would be impossible to list all the aspects of the Commission's work that 
may require reasonable accommodation to assure access, but the following 
sections can provide general guidance and reminders to help keep accessibility 
in the forefront of our awareness so that the Commission's programs and 
activities will be accessible to everyone. 

[Page 3]
2.  BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ACCESS

The starting point for providing access is simple courtesy and common sense. 
If an overarching goal of the Commission is to ensure that all interested 
individuals with disabilities have access to the Commission's programs and 
activities, then the means for providing access is only a matter of 
mechanics--matching the solution to the need.  It is when people with 
disabilities are overlooked as potential or actual consumers that barriers are 
raised.  And, ironically, it is these, often unconscious, barriers that can be 
the hardest to overcome.  Remembering the following principles when planning 
and implementing Commission activities and programs can help keep access in 
our consciousness: 

* The Commission, its programs, and activities MUST be accessible.  This is 
mandated by statute and by FCC rules. *2 

* When meetings or events are scheduled, the event planner, or person calling 
the meeting, is responsible for assuring accessibility.  The Commission's 
Section 504 Officer is available for consultation and can assist in 
determining accessibility needs. 

* Individuals attending events or meetings who need reasonable accommodations 
must inform the meeting/event planner of their needs.  However, it is the 
meeting/event planner's obligation to announce events with sufficient lead 
time to give attendees an opportunity to ask for such accommodations. 

* Individuals with disabilities are the best sources of information regarding 
the accommodations they will need.  If you are unsure of what to do, ask the 
person with a disability about his or her preferences. 

[Page 4]
3.  Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act *3

Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended is the legislation 
that prohibits federal agencies, and other program and activities receiving 
federal financial assistance, from discriminating against individuals with 
disabilities. *4  It is therefore this legislation that most directly affects 
the FCC.  

The Rehabilitation Act is sometimes confused with the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) *5 which was passed in 1990.  While there are many 
parallels between the Rehabilitation Act and the ADA, there are some 
fundamental differences.  Both laws are designed to prohibit discrimination 
against individuals with disabilities.  Both share many of the same 
definitions and provisions.  However, where the Rehabilitation Act pertains to 
federal agencies and entities receiving federal funding, the ADA applies to 
State and local governments, public accommodations, commercial facilities, 
transportation, telecommunications, and the U.S. Congress. *6, *7 

[Page 5]
4.  DISABILITY RIGHTS MOVEMENT

Disability

The American disability rights movement was a catalyzing factor in the 
emergence of current disability rights legislation.  The Smithsonian 
Institution's National Museum of American History maintains a Virtual 
Exhibition featuring the history of the disability rights movement in the 
United States.  The following text comes from their display, "Disability 
Rights Movement" *8 and provides a concise summary of the movement and issues 
that led to present day legislation. 

The Disability Rights Movement

The ongoing struggle by people with disabilities to gain full citizenship is 
an important part of our American heritage. The disability rights movement 
shares many similarities with other 20th-century civil rights struggles by 
those who have been denied equality, independence, autonomy, and full access 
to society. 

Self Definition and Autonomy

Historically, disabled people have been forced into dependency. Others would 
speak for them, label them, and take care of them -- often with the best 
intentions.  As a result of 20th-century developments in biotechnical 
medicine, by the 1950s, more and more people survived formerly fatal injuries 
and diseases. Efforts by this growing population of military veterans and 
young adults to participate fully in society gained momentum. 

They were energized by the struggles of African Americans. Both groups have 
confronted numerous stereotypes in their quest for equality, inclusion in 
public affairs, and sometimes the right simply to live. 
 
Parents Organize

By the 1940s and 1950s, parent activists had organized to fight for education 
and services for children with disabilities. When these children grew up, they 
demanded to be treated as adults, with all the rights and responsibilities 
granted to other citizens. Their new disability rights movement has sought to 
overcome discrimination and, sometimes, their own parents' fears and overly 
protective attitudes. 

[Page 6]
DISABILITY AND DISABILITY LAWS -- "Disability Rights Movement" (continued) 

The Role of Technology

Like efforts organized to break [other] barriers...the disability rights 
movement has resulted from people coming together in ways that allow them to 
compare experiences and forge relationships. For the community with 
disabilities, this has taken place primarily in centers for independent 
living, which started in the 1970s, and via the Internet since the 1990s. 

Crucial to the movement's success is access to information and communication 
through technologies such as telecaptioners, TTY devices for telephones, 
voice-recognition systems, voice synthesizers, screen readers, and computers. 

Mobility

The disability civil rights movement had to not only overcome prejudice, but 
also physical barriers that limit access to employment and inclusion in other 
aspects of daily life. 

Activists successfully lobbied for laws that required curb-cuts, ramps, and 
buses with wheelchair lifts. This in turn increased the possibility of 
economic and social mobility. In the 1970s and 1980s, a growing population of 
consumers with mobility impairments fueled demand for wheelchairs and scooters 
to match their active lives. At the same time, barrier-free designs have 
brought a new aesthetic to public spaces. 

[Page 7]
II. ACCESSIBILITY AND THE FCC

[Page 8]
1.  TYPES OF ACCESS REQUESTED

For purposes of the Section 504 Handbook, accessibility refers to the ability 
of people with disabilities to "participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, 
programs or activities conducted by the Commission." *9  For general 
information on disabilities and access, contact the Commission's Section 504 
Officer. *10 

The accessibility requests we receive, from both the public and FCC staff, 
tend to fall into the following categories:  

Access for people with mobility impairments

Since the Portals II building is accessible, people with mobility impairments 
are generally able to move throughout the building as they wish.  When 
planning meetings, however, if you are expecting participants who use 
wheelchairs, scooters, canes, crutches, or other mobility aids, make sure that 
the aisles between chairs and/or tables are wide enough to allow comfortable 
passage.  

If your meeting is to take place at a table, make sure that there is room for 
a wheelchair or scooter to pull up.  This can be easily accomplished by 
removing one or two chairs and leaving the space open. 

Access for people who are blind or have low vision

People who are blind or have low vision may request a variety of 
accommodations.  The type of accommodation requested depends upon the nature 
of the material requested, the type and severity of the visual impairment, and 
personal preferences.  

In-house, the Commission is able to produce text documents in large print, *11 
electronic formats, *12 braille, *13 and some audio formats. *14  Requests for 
other formats, such as conversion of graphics into tactilely accessible media 
or for video description, *15 are often sent to outside contractors. 

[Page 9]
ACCESSIBILITY DEFINED - Types of Access Requested - Access for people who are 
deaf or hard of hearing (continued) 

Access for people who are deaf or hard of hearing

Generally, people who are deaf or hard of hearing request assistive listening 
devices, *16 captioning, *17 CART *18 (Communication Access Realtime 
Translation--similar to captioning but confined to a laptop or projection 
screen), or sign language interpreters. *19  

The Commission is equipped with fixed FM assistive listening systems in the 
Commission Meeting Room and in Conference Room 1 on the 8th floor.  In 
addition, there are 2 portable FM systems that can be used throughout the 
building and at remote locations.  The systems are outfitted with microphones, 
earphones, and neckloops. *20 

Captioning, CART, and sign language interpreters are services that are 
frequently contracted from outside vendors.  In the DC area, such services are 
widely used with demand often out-stripping supply.  As much advance notice as 
possible is needed to assure that appropriate services can be acquired.  The 
Commission also has several sign language interpreters on staff who assist in 
making Commission events accessible. 

People who are deaf or hard of hearing may use other accommodations such as 
oral interpreters, *21 cued speech transliterators, *22 tactile interpreters, 
*23 and notetakers, *24 but these services are rarely requested at the 
Commission. 

[Page 10]
ACCESSIBILITY DEFINED - Types of Access Requested (continued)

Access for people with speech disabilities

Speech disabilities can be genetically linked or can result from accident, 
injury, or illness. The severity and type of speech disability can vary 
dramatically as can the communication modes individuals choose to use.  Some 
people with speech disabilities choose to speak for themselves while others 
opt for using a re-voicer, *25 communication board, *26 artificial larynx, *27 
speech output device, *28 or other assistive technology to help them be 
understood. 

Regardless of the severity of disability or the method of communication, 
patience and careful listening are of paramount importance.  When talking with 
people who have speech disabilities, do not pretend to understand what they 
are saying.  Allow people to complete their thoughts; do not presume to end 
sentences for them.  If you 

[Page 11]
ACCESSIBILITY DEFINED - Types of Access Requested - Access for people with 
speech disabilities (continued) 

do not understand what has been said, admit it and ask for a repetition.  If 
you are unsure, but think you understand part of what has been said, repeat 
what you thought you heard and ask for confirmation. 

Access for people with other disabilities

Most of the disabilities encountered at the FCC fall into the four categories 
discussed above.  However people may have other disabilities or combinations 
of disabilities.  When encountering people with any type of disability, but 
particularly when it is a form of disability new to you, remember to focus on 
the person first, not his or her disability.  Use courtesy and common sense 
and ask the person with a disability for his or her advice on how to proceed. 


[Page 12]

2.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR PHYSICAL ACCESS 

Buildings / Rooms / Hallways

In most cases, federal buildings adhere to the UFAS (Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standards) guidelines established by the Architectural and 
Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Access Board). *29  The UFAS "sets 
standards for facility accessibility by physically handicapped persons for 
Federal and federally-funded facilities.  These standards are to be applied 
during the design, construction, and alteration of buildings and facilities to 
the extent required by the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended." *30 

Beyond the structural design elements of access, there are practical, everyday 
decisions that Commission staff can make to assure optimal physical access to 
FCC programs and activities.  Among the considerations that should be kept in 
mind are the following: 

* Keep aisles and doorways clear.  Do not block pathways with boxes, furniture 
or other obstacles. 

* When arranging meeting rooms or seating areas, be sure to allow aisles 
between tables and/or chairs that are wide enough to permit easy passage for 
wheelchairs, scooters, and people using other mobility aids. 

* When placing chairs in pre-arranged seating arrangements, include gaps in 
the seating plan to allow space for people who use wheelchairs or scooters. 

* If accommodations that require user activation are installed in the building 
--for example, chair lifts that require keys to operate them--make sure that 
the key or other means of activation is easily available for users with 
disabilities.  It does little good to have a lift installed if the key that is 
required to operate it is in an office on the other side of the lift!  Keep in 
mind that lifts and other similar aids must be easily accessible in both 
directions, i.e., "coming" and "going." 

* Do not assume that all people with similar disabilities will want identical 
accommodations.  If you are unsure of what to do, ask the person with a 
disability for guidance. 


[Page 13]
3.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR INFORMATION ACCESS

Forms / Public information / Complaints / Media, etc.

When developing forms, publications, press releases, solicitations for 
consumer input, or other information gathering or disseminating tools and 
processes, be sure to consider the accessibility of both the content and the 
medium you elect to use.  

* Choose a font style and size that is easy to read. *31 

There are no hard and fast rules guiding the selection of font styles and 
sizes.  In fact, publication manuals and guidelines vary dramatically in their 
rules and preferences.  There is, however, some general agreement on the 
following principles: 

* For print documents, serif fonts are easier to read.  Serif fonts have 
little "feet" attached to each letter; Times New Roman is an example of a 
serif font. *32  

* For electronic displays, sans serif fonts are easier to read.  Sans serif 
fonts lack the little "feet" attached to each letter; Arial is an example of a 
sans serif font. *33 

* For large print, the size of type required will vary with the needs of the 
reader.  For generically produced large print, a font size of 16 to 18 is 
preferred. *34 

* Use high contrast colors when possible.  It may be difficult for people with 
low vision to see information that is presented in colors that do not contrast 
strongly. 


[Page 14]
CONSIDERATIONS FOR INFORMATION ACCESS (continued)

* Remember that approximately 7% of all males have some form of red-green 
colorblindness; this condition only affects .4% of women.  For many people 
with this disorder, red and green look essentially alike. *35  Keep this in 
mind when designing color documents. *36 

* Remember to include an accessibility statement in any documents you 
disseminate.  For further guidance, see the "Disseminating News Releases, 
Public Notices, Texts, and Other Documents" section of this Handbook beginning 
on page 32. 

* Existing documents that are not in accessible format for either the public 
(e.g., those mentioned above) or staff (e.g., personnel records, Federal 
forms), must be made accessible for people with disabilities upon request.  

If a person with a disability contacts you asking for assistance with 
Commission information or resources, help them to the best of your ability.  
If you find that you are unable to satisfy their need, and the request is not 
related to web access, ask them to send an e-mail to: fcc504@fcc.gov or 
contact the Commission's Section 504 Officer. *37  

For further guidance on web accessibility and information disseminated via the 
internet, contact the Commission's Section 508 Officer. *38 


[Page 15]
4.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR STAFF ACTIVITIES 

Office parties / Holiday celebrations / Federally recognized employee 
organizations *39 / etc. 

Remember that people with disabilities are also members of the FCC staff. *40  
All programs or activities should be planned with an eye to ensuring access 
for anyone who would like to attend.  

* When disseminating FCC generated notices, distributing flyers, or making 
posters, be sure to include an accessibility statement.  Remember that the 
"host" of the event assumes responsibility for arranging for accommodations 
for people with disabilities.  For further guidance, see the "Meetings, 
Documents, Training" section of this Handbook on pages 21-39. 

* When broadcast messages are sent via voice mail system, make sure the 
information is shared with staff members who are deaf or hard of hearing. 


[Page 16]
5.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR SAFETY 

Building Evacuation

* Remember that people who are deaf or hard of hearing may not be able to hear 
broadcasts over the public address system or verbal instructions from building 
monitors or security officers.  Rumors or instructions passed by word of mouth 
are also likely to be missed by a person who is deaf or hard of hearing.  If 
you know of someone in your area who is deaf or hard of hearing, make sure 
that you pass along information about emergency situations. 

* Remember that people who are blind cannot see you.  Before attempting to 
help people who are blind, introduce yourself and ask them if they would like 
assistance. If they accept your offer of help, allow them to take your arm; do 
not push or drag them along with you.  If you are uncertain about what to do, 
ask the person how they would like to proceed.  

* People who have low vision have varying levels of sight -- some may be able 
to discern shapes, others may only be able to identify areas that are light or 
dark, still others may have tunnel vision, or may be able to see only in areas 
with bright lighting.  Before helping someone who appears to have vision 
problems, ask if they would like help.  If they accept your offer of 
assistance, ask the person how they would like to proceed. 

* There are established procedures for evacuating people who have significant 
mobility impairments.  Evacuation chairs and trained personnel are 
strategically located throughout the building.  During an emergency, contact 
one of the safety monitors stationed in the elevator lobbies if such services 
are needed.  Consult the Emergency Evacuation Procedures document on the FCC 
intranet (http://intranet.fcc.gov/) for more detailed instructions.  

Security Issues

* When giving directions in emergency or high stress situations, do not assume 
that people who are non-responsive are being uncooperative.  

* People who are deaf or hard of hearing may be unable to hear spoken 
instructions.  Even people who have substantial residual hearing may have 
difficulty hearing instructions coming from behind them or orders given in 
areas with background noise such as fire alarms or the chatter from crowds of 
people. 


[Page 17]
CONSIDERATIONS FOR SAFETY-- Security issues (continued)

* People who are blind or have low vision may not see gestures or other visual 
cues indicating where they should go or what they should do.  

* When going through standard security screening procedures in the Portals II 
building, it is helpful to inform people who are blind of the process they are 
about to experience.  Give verbal cues as to where to place items for 
inspection and how to pass through the metal detectors. 

* Remember that some people with disabilities have assistive devices that are 
not easily removed.  Some devices, such as cochlear implants to improve 
hearing or metal rods to strengthen bones, are surgically implanted and cannot 
be taken off or detached .  Be aware that such devices may set off metal 
detectors and be prepared to use courtesy and good judgment in dealing with 
such situations. 


[Page 18]
6.  CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONTRACTING AND ACQUISITIONS 

Contracting / Acquisitions / Services / Equipment, etc.

All of the Commission's programs and activities must be accessible to people 
with disabilities.  This includes programs and activities offered by the 
Commission through contracts or other arrangements. *41  Agreements between 
the Commission and other entities for the provision of programs or activities 
should be carefully written to ensure that access for people with disabilities 
is explicitly required in the statement of work. 


[Page 19]
This page is intentionally blank.



[Page 20]
III. MEETINGS / DOCUMENTS / TRAINING



[Page 21]
1.  INTERNAL FCC MEETINGS

If your meeting is open to all FCC staff...
AND is scheduled in the Commission Meeting Room...

* Be sure that you arrange for captioning.  Meetings intended for all 
Commission staff, scheduled in the Commission Meeting Room, should be 
captioned.  Contact the Commission Audio Visual Center, *42 Office of Media 
Relations, to arrange for captioning services.  Be sure to allow as much lead 
time as possible.  Captioning services are in high demand and may not be 
available without sufficient notice. *43 

* Include a reasonable accommodation statement in all announcements and 
publicity, including all invitations, flyers, posters, e-mails, 
advertisements, etc. 

Model statement:

Reasonable Accommodations

Open captioning will be provided for this event.  Other reasonable 
accommodations for people with disabilities are available upon request.  
Include a description of the accommodation you will need including as much 
detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if we need more 
information.  Make your request as early as possible; please allow at least 5 
days advance notice.  Last minute requests will be accepted, but may be 
impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & 
Governmental Affairs Bureau: 

For sign language interpreters, CART, and other reasonable accommodations:  
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 

For accessible format materials (braille, large print, electronic files, and 
audio format): 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 


* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance.


[Page 22]
INTERNAL FCC MEETINGS (continued)

If your meeting is open to all FCC staff...

AND is scheduled for a location other than the Commission Meeting Room

* Include a reasonable accommodation statement in all announcements and 
publicity, including all invitations, flyers, posters, e-mails, 
advertisements, etc. 


Model statement:

Reasonable Accommodations

Reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities are available upon 
request.  Include a description of the accommodation you will need including 
as much detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if we need 
more information.  Please allow at least 5 days advance notice; last minute 
requests will be accepted, but may be impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to 
fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau: 

For sign language interpreters, CART, and other reasonable accommodations:  
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 

For accessible format materials (braille, large print, electronic files, and 
audio format): 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 



* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 


[Page 23]
INTERNAL FCC MEETINGS (continued) 

If your meeting is for a limited FCC audience... (division meeting, internal 
task force, committee, etc.) 

AND you know the attendees

Be sure to request accommodations *44 (e.g., captioning, accessible formats, 
sign language interpreters, etc.) you know will be needed as far in advance as 
possible.

AND you DON'T know the attendees

* Include a reasonable accommodation statement in your invitation or 
announcement. 


Model statement:

Reasonable Accommodations

Reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities are available upon 
request.  Include a description of the accommodation you will need including 
as much detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if we need 
more information.  Make your request as early as possible; please allow at 
least 5 days advance notice.  Last minute requests will be accepted, but may 
be impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer 
& Governmental Affairs Bureau: 

For sign language interpreters, CART, and other reasonable accommodations:  
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 

For accessible format materials (braille, large print, electronic files, and 
audio format): 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 



* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 


[Page 24]
INTERNAL FCC MEETINGS (continued)

If your meeting requires pre-registration...

* Be sure your registration form includes an option for requesting 
accommodations. 

Model accommodation request section: 


Reasonable Accommodations

I need the following reasonable accommodation:

Accessible Format (Please specify below)
__  Audiocassette (analog)
__  Braille
__  Large Print
__  Digital Audio Recording 
   Please circle one: 3.5" Floppy Disk, CD, E-mail attachment
   Please circle one: MP3, RealAudio
__  Digital Text 
   Please circle one: 3.5" Floppy Disk, CD, E-mail attachment
   Please circle one: ASCII, MSWord
__  Other (Please specify) 


Sign Language Interpreter
CART (Communication Access Realtime Translation)
Assistive Listening Device 
Other (please specify) 




* As soon as a request for accommodation is received, consult the chart on 
page 45 of this Handbook and forward the request to the appropriate person.  

* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 


[Page 25]
2.  MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES

If your meeting is a Commission Open Meeting...

* Display open captioning on both screens in the Commission Meeting Room, the 
hallway monitors, the internet webcast, and the Commission's closed circuit 
television broadcast. *45  Contact the Commission Audio Visual Center, *46 
Office of Media Relations, to arrange for captioning services. 

* Provide Sign language interpreters. *47 The interpreters will be expected to 
interpret for the duration of the proceedings regardless of whether deaf 
attendees are readily identified.  Interpreters are not required to interpret 
for the Press Conference following the Open Meeting UNLESS they are requested 
to do so by a deaf consumer or by Commission staff. 

* Supply agendas in both braille and large print. *48 

* Note in the Sunshine Notice that the above accommodations will be provided 
and indicate how other accommodations can be acquired. 

Model notice:

Reasonable Accommodations

The meeting site is fully accessible to people using wheelchairs or other 
mobility aids.  Meeting agendas and handouts will be provided in accessible 
formats; sign language interpreters, open captioning, and assistive listening 
devices will be provided on site.  The meeting will be webcast with open 
captioning [note web address].  Request other reasonable accommodations for 
people with disabilities as early as possible; please allow at least 5 days 
advance notice.  Include a description of the accommodation you will need 
including as much detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if 
we need more information.  Last minute requests will be accepted, but may be 
impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to: fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & 
Governmental Affairs Bureau at 202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty). 


* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 


[Page 26]
MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES (continued)

If your meeting is a public meeting with no pre-registration required...

* Be sure that you arrange for captioning.  Meetings open to the general 
public, scheduled in the Commission Meeting Room, should be captioned.  
Meeting planners should contact the Audio Visual Center, *49 Office of Media 
Relations, to arrange for captioning services.  Be sure to allow as much lead 
time as possible.  Captioning services are in high demand and may not be 
available without sufficient notice. *50 

* Include a reasonable accommodation statement in all announcements and 
publicity, including all invitations, flyers, posters, e-mails, 
advertisements, etc. 

Model statement:

Reasonable Accommodations

Open captioning will be provided for this event.  Other reasonable 
accommodations for people with disabilities are available upon request.  
Include a description of the accommodation you will need including as much 
detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if we need more 
information.  Make your request as early as possible; please allow at least 5 
days advance notice.  Last minute requests will be accepted, but may be 
impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & 
Governmental Affairs Bureau: 

For sign language interpreters, CART, and other reasonable accommodations:  
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 

For accessible format materials (braille, large print, electronic files, and 
audio format): 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 


* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 

* Notify the Security Operations Center *51 if you expect visitors with 
disabilities. Advance notice allows the Operations Center to assign sufficient 
security staff to screen visitors.  It also allows security officers to 
prepare themselves for alternative communication modes and reminds them to 
expect visitors with assistive devices that may require special handling when 
going through metal detectors.  


[Page 27]
MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES (continued)

If your meeting is open to a limited public audience...

AND you know the attendees

Be sure to request accommodations *52 (e.g., captioning, accessible formats, 
sign language interpreters, etc.) you know will be needed as far in advance as 
possible. 

AND you DON'T know the attendees

* Include a reasonable accommodation statement in your invitation or 
announcement. 

Model statement:

Reasonable Accommodations

Reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities are available upon 
request.  Include a description of the accommodation you will need including 
as much detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if we need 
more information.  Make your request as early as possible; please allow at 
least 5 days advance notice.  Last minute requests will be accepted, but may 
be impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer 
& Governmental Affairs Bureau: 

For sign language interpreters, CART, and other reasonable accommodations:  
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 

For accessible format materials (braille, large print, electronic files, and 
audio format): 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 

* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 

* Notify the Security Operations Center *53 if you expect visitors with 
disabilities.  Advance notice allows the Operations Center to assign 
sufficient security staff to screen visitors.  It also allows security 
officers to prepare themselves for alternative communication modes and reminds 
them to expect visitors with assistive devices that may require special 
handling when going through metal detectors.  


[Page 28]
MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES (continued)

If your meeting focuses on issues you expect to be of interest to people with 
disabilities... 

* Display open captioning on both screens in the Commission Meeting Room, the 
hallway monitors, the internet webcast, and the Commission's closed circuit 
television broadcast. *54  Contact the Commission Audio Visual Center, *55 
Office of Media Relations, to arrange for captioning services. 

* Supply agendas and handouts produced in braille and large print. *56 

* Sign language interpreters. *57  At the beginning of the event, if you are 
unsure whether deaf consumers are in attendance, consult with the interpreters 
to see if they are aware of any deaf attendees.  If they are also unsure, make 
an announcement from the podium noting that interpreters are available and 
inquiring if there are any attendees who wish to use their services.  
Naturally, the interpreter will be expected to interpret this announcement.  
If no consumers indicate a need, the interpreter may retire to an agreed upon 
location to await any subsequent request.  If a registration desk is used, it 
is an ideal place for the interpreters to sit, identified with a sign reading: 
Sign Language Interpreters.  Late arrivers will then have the opportunity to 
note the availability of interpreters while they are signing in.  If there is 
no registration desk, then position the interpreters near the entrance to the 
meeting room or in some other highly visible area. 

Sample wording for announcement of interpreter availability:

Sign language interpreters are available for this meeting.  Although we have 
had no requests for interpreting services, we would like to make sure that we 
are meeting the needs of all attendees.  If there is anyone currently in 
attendance who needs the services of an interpreter, please so indicate to the 
interpreter.  [pause for response] 

Thank you.  [continue with meeting content]


* The Public Notice should note that the above accommodations will be provided 
and should indicate how other accommodations can be acquired. 



[Page 29]
MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES -- If Your Meeting Focuses on Issues You 
Expect to be of Interest to People With Disabilities (continued) 

Model notice:

Reasonable Accommodations

The meeting site is fully accessible to people using wheelchairs or other 
mobility aids.  Meeting agendas and handouts will be provided in accessible 
formats; sign language interpreters, open captioning, and assistive listening 
devices will be provided on site.  The meeting will be webcast with open 
captioning [note web address].  Request other reasonable accommodations for 
people with disabilities as early as possible; please allow at least 5 days 
advance notice.  Include a description of the accommodation you will need 
including as much detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if 
we need more information.  Last minute requests will be accepted, but may be 
impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to: fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & 
Governmental Affairs Bureau at 202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty). 


* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 

* Notify the Security Operations Center *58 if you expect visitors with 
disabilities Advance notice allows the Operations Center to assign sufficient 
security staff to screen visitors.  It also allows security officers to 
prepare themselves for alternative communication modes and reminds them to 
expect visitors with assistive devices that may require special handling when 
going through metal detectors.  


Don't know if your issues are of interest to people with disabilities?

If you are unsure whether your meeting topic is of interest to the disability 
community, consult the Chief of the Disability Rights Office. *59 



[Page 30]
MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES (continued)

If your meeting requires pre-registration...

* Be sure your registration form includes an option for requesting 
accommodations. 

Model accommodation request section:

Reasonable Accommodations

I need the following reasonable accommodation:
Accessible Format (Please specify below)
__  Audiocassette (analog)
__  Braille
__  Large Print
__  Digital Audio Recording 
   Please circle one: 3.5" Floppy Disk, CD, E-mail attachment
   Please circle one: MP3, RealAudio
__  Digital Text 
   Please circle one: 3.5" Floppy Disk, CD, E-mail attachment
   Please circle one: ASCII, MSWord
__  Other (Please specify) 


Sign Language Interpreter
CART (Communication Access Realtime Translation)
Assistive Listening Device 
Other (please specify) 



* As soon as a request for accommodation is received, consult the chart on 
page 45 of this Handbook and forward the request to the appropriate person.  

* Make sure that your first public announcement is released at least one full 
week in advance. 



[Page 31]
MEETINGS WITH NON-FCC ATTENDEES -- If your meeting requires pre-registration 
(continued) 


* Notify the Security Operations Center *60 if you expect visitors with 
disabilities. Advance notice allows the Operations Center to assign sufficient 
security staff to screen visitors.  It also allows security officers to 
prepare themselves for alternative communication modes and reminds them to 
expect visitors with assistive devices that may require special handling when 
going through metal detectors.  


[Page 32]
3.  DISSEMINATING NEWS RELEASES, PUBLIC NOTICES, TEXTS, AND OTHER DOCUMENTS

* Include an accessible format statement in your releases. 

Model statement:

Accessible Formats

To request materials in accessible formats for people with disabilities 
(braille, large print, electronic files, audio format), send an e-mail to 
fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau at 202-418-
0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty). 


* Make sure that you indicate the web address consumers can use to get an 
electronic copy.  Follow the Commission's Section 508 Guidelines to assure 
appropriate web formats for your information.  For more details on Section 
508, contact the Commission's Section 508 Officer. *61  


[Page 33]
4.  HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS

Hosting successful meetings or events *62 requires cooperation between event 
planners, chairpersons, emcees, moderators, coordinators, and attendees.  The 
following hosting responsibilities and guidelines can help produce accessible 
events that comply with Section 504 requirements. 

Opening announcements  

* Announce the availability of any accommodations that are in place.  Example: 
"For the [event name] today, we have the following accessibility services 
available [mention those actually in place for the event, e.g., sign language 
interpreters, assistive listening devices (ALDs), CART and/or captioning.] 
Also, agendas and handouts are available in large print, electronic format, 
and braille.  If anyone needs assistance in locating where these services are 
being provided please let [identify any Commission staff who can assist in 
getting attendees the appropriate service(s) or products-ask the Commission 
staff identified to stand] know." 
 
* Provide verbal directions to accessible restroom facilities.  For example, 
if the meeting is being held in the Commission Meeting Room, give directions 
similar to the following: "Accessible restrooms are located on the 12th Street 
level (this floor) at the following location:  When exiting the Commission 
Meeting Room use the exit on the far right (or on the left, depending on where 
the speaker is located).  Continue straight forward from the exit door for 
about 40 feet, then turn at the first corridor to the left.  Restrooms are 
located immediately on your left, first the Men's then the Women's restrooms." 

* Provide verbal directions to any other amenities attendees may need to know 
about; e.g., area delis/restaurants, payphones, TTYs, ATMs. 

Meeting moderators

* Introduce all speakers and panelists verbally by name.  An alternative 
method is to ask the speakers/panelists to take turns introducing themselves. 

* Make it a practice to recognize individuals who would like to take the 
floor. 

  * This will avoid situations where several people attempt to speak at the 
same time.  This is both good meeting practice and an aid to interpreters, 
CART writers, and captioners who are only able to render the comments of one 
speaker at a time. 


[Page 34]
HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS - Meeting Moderators: Recognizing 
individuals who would like to take the floor (continued) 

  * This will identify the speaker for attendees who are blind or have low 
vision as well as for CART writers, captioners, and sign language 
interpreters.  

  * A variation that is often used, particularly for events with attendees who 
are blind or have low vision, is to ask speakers to identify themselves each 
time they make a comment.  This also is of benefit to captioners, CART 
writers, sign language interpreters, and members of the audience using these 
accommodations. 

  * Since there is always a time lag between the time captioners, 
interpreters, and CART writers hear a message and are able to translate it, 
people who depend upon their services receive such information at a point 
slightly behind hearing participants.  This frequently puts people who are 
deaf and hard of hearing at a disadvantage when trying to make a point or to 
respond to a question.  By the time the question or issue is conveyed to them, 
others have already begun answering.  By controlling access to the floor, the 
moderator can provide more equitable opportunities for comment and response. 

* Verbally acknowledge any speakers/panelists joining the meeting while in 
progress, or leaving the meeting before it ends. [For example:  "We've just 
been joined by Alex Bell from FCC Corp....glad to have you with us!" (Give 
Alex a chance to respond briefly.  This will orient people who are blind or 
have low vision to his location and to his voice.) Then return to the 
discussion at hand.] 

* If the public address system is not working properly, interrupt the speaker, 
reminding them to wait until the microphone is working correctly and repeat 
their comments using the working public address system.  Participants relying 
on ALDs, sign language interpreters, captioning, and CART text will miss the 
information if it does not come through the PA system. 

* Remember to be patient.  It will take extra time for individuals with speech 
disabilities or individuals using sign language interpreters, captioning, or 
CART to fully participate in discussions.  Participants with speech 
disabilities may require additional time to complete their comments.  And, 
individuals using sign language interpreters, captions, and CART, experience 
delays in receiving information as well as expressing comments.  On average, 
there is a 1-10 second delay between the time a comment is uttered and the 
time the complete sign language interpretation is presented.  Similarly, there 
is a 1-15 second delay for the complete captioned or CART text to appear.  
There is a similar delay when a response is expressed in sign language and 
interpreted into speech.  Thus, asking a question or soliciting comments and 
then quickly selecting the first person to raise a hand or shout out a 
response, does not allow those experiencing time delays an opportunity to 
participate.  It also discriminates against those who require more time to 
express themselves. 



[Page 35]
HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS - Meeting Moderators (continued)

* If the text of any handout or A/V presentation is not available in 
accessible formats (i.e., Braille, electronic text file, audio recording), 
announce to the audience how to obtain a copy in an accessible format.  
Example: "We regret that the [document, PowerPoint presentation, agenda, etc.] 
is not available in braille, large print, or electronic text.  However, anyone 
in the audience can contact the Commission's Accessible Format Specialist, 
Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau, to obtain a copy in the format you 
prefer.  You can call 202-418-0531 or 202-418-7365 (tty) or you can send an e-
mail to fcc504@fcc.gov." 

* Be aware of any changes to the physical environment.  If at any time before, 
during, or after the meeting, pathways or aisles become blocked for wheelchair 
access, move the barrier or designate someone to do so as soon as possible.  
Also, if the layout of the meeting room is changed during the meeting (for 
example, tables/chairs moved in a different configuration, additional 
equipment brought in, etc.), announce the changes or additions to the audience 
and warn them of hazards associated with the change(s)/addition(s), (e.g., 
power cords, cables, etc.)  This will be especially helpful for attendees who 
are blind or have low vision.  Example: "Just so that everyone is aware, we'll 
need to change the location of some of the tables during the break in order to 
accommodate the equipment coming in for the next session.  Also, please be 
aware that in order for the equipment to operate, there will be a power 
cord/cable that will be taped to the carpet that will run across the aisle.  
So please exercise caution when walking in the aisle area or close to the 
equipment when it is set up." 

* Always describe any changes to preprinted agendas, handouts, or other 
materials. 

* When an acronym that is not commonly known to the general public is first 
used, be sure to pause the discussion momentarily, giving the spelling and/or 
meaning of the acronym.  Not only will this be helpful to the audience, but 
will also be of invaluable assistance in providing accurate information to 
sign language interpreters, captioners, and CART writers.  Example: "Excuse 
me.  Just to help clarify what 'Nancy' is - it's the acronym for the North 
American Numbering Council, N-A-N-C, which is often pronounced, 'Nancy."  It 
is ... [provide explanation]." 


[Page 36]
HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS (continued)   

Audio and visual media

Organizers and planners of Commission meetings must make sure that all 
attendees, including individuals with disabilities, are not "excluded from 
participation in," or "denied the benefits of" meetings and events. *63  In 
order to ensure that everyone can participate in and benefit from the meeting 
or event, it is vital that the organizer know, to the extent possible, what 
audio/visual presentations *64 will be used.  

Presenters with printed handouts or audio/visual media...

AND people with disabilities are expected  

* Inform the presenters of the Commission's obligation to provide access to 
people with disabilities.  Ask the presenters whether printed handouts or 
audio/visual elements will be included in their respective presentations.  If 
such materials will be in use, then... 

  In advance of the meeting, request a copy of the media that presenters plan 
to use -- printed handouts, audio/visual elements, etc.   If available, an 
electronic version is preferred. 
  
  * For conversion of print and other textual media to braille, large print, 
electronic text, or audio format, contact the Commission's Accessible Format 
Specialist, Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-
418-7365 (tty), fcc504@fcc.gov.   

    - When using slides or other graphic displays that do not include textual 
content (for example pictures, drawings, unlabeled charts, etc.), please 
provide a description of the key visual elements; include an explanation of 
any special significance implied by the manner of presentation.  For example, 
if a parody of a company logo is displayed, note that it is a satirical 
depiction of Company X's logo. Then proceed to describe what the image looks 
like.  

    - If possible, submit materials at least 5 business days prior to the date 
they are needed so that the conversion to accessible format can be completed 
by the day of the event. 



[Page 37]
HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS - Audio and visual media - Presenters 
with printed handouts...AND people with disabilities expected (continued) 

* For consultation regarding video or other non-text media that is not 
captioned, contact the Commission's Section 504 Officer, Consumer & 
Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty), 
fcc504@fcc.gov to determine the arrangements needed to assure access.  Please 
allow as much lead time as possible. 

* Remind presenters and event moderators that information contained in working 
documents, flipcharts, posters, and visual aids must be read or described in 
order for the information to be accessible to the entire audience.  

  * If, as a group, you are editing or revising a document, be sure to re-read 
any sections or contextual material necessary to convey to the group the full 
impact of the change(s) to be made. 

  * If you are exhibiting a diagram or model, be sure to describe the 
individual parts as well as any interactions or changes that are being shown.  
If animation or special effects are being used, be sure to describe those as 
well. 


Presenters with printed handouts or audio/visual media...

AND it is unknown if people with disabilities will attend...   

* Inform the presenters of the Commission's obligation to provide access to 
people with disabilities.  Ask the presenters whether printed handouts or 
audio/visual elements will be included in their presentations.  If such 
materials will be in use, then.... 

  * Request that presenters have copies of the media they plan to use readily 
available in the event that people with disabilities should request 
accommodations.  Inform the presenter that if a request for accommodation is 
received, they will be asked to forward a copy of their presentation materials 
to the Commission immediately so that we may convert them into accessible 
format. 



[Page 38]
HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS (continued) 

If you are invited to speak at a non-FCC event...

AND have handouts or audio/visual presentations...

Check with the event planner to find out whether the sponsoring organization 
has made arrangements for accessibility for individuals with disabilities.  

If the hosts HAVE MADE ARRANGEMENTS for accommodations...

* Have copies of handouts and audio/visual media ready for your hosts so that 
they can have them produced in accessible format. 

* If interpreters are being provided and you would like some guidelines on how 
to work with them, see the section on sign language interpreters beginning on 
page 82. 

If the hosts HAVE NOT MADE ARRANGEMENTS for accommodations or do not know if 
people with disabilities plan to attend... 

* Be prepared to read or describe any document or A/V presentation you will be 
sharing.  

  * If the group is editing or revising a document, be sure to re-read any 
sections or contextual material necessary to convey to the group the full 
impact of the change(s) to be made. 
  
  * If you are exhibiting a diagram or model, be sure to describe the 
individual parts as well as any interactions or changes that are being shown.  
If animation or special effects are being used, be sure to describe those as 
well. 

* If you would like to have copies of your materials in accessible 
format (braille, large print, electronic text, or audio formats) to take with 
you to your presentation, send the document (preferably in electronic format) 
to the Commission's Accessible Format Specialist, Consumer & Governmental 
Affairs Bureau, 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty), fcc504@fcc.gov, at 
least 5 business days prior to your departure date. 

When submitting slides or other graphic displays that do not include textual 
content (for example pictures, drawings, unlabeled charts, etc.) for 
conversion to accessible format, please provide a description of the key 
visual elements; include an explanation of any special significance implied by 
the manner of presentation.  For example, if a parody of a company logo is 
displayed, note that it is a satirical depiction of Company X's logo. Then 
proceed to describe what the image looks like.  


[Page 39]
HOSTING ACCESSIBLE MEETINGS AND EVENTS - IF YOU ARE INVITED TO SPEAK AT A NON-
FCC EVENT AND HAVE HANDOUTS OR AUDIO/VISUAL PRESENTATIONS - If the hosts have 
NOT made arrangements for accommodations (continued) 


* If you do not have accessible copies of your materials with you, state at 
the beginning of your presentation that your materials can be provided in 
accessible format upon request.  Ask audience members who need such formats to 
supply you with the following information: 

  * Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address 

  * Specific materials they would like converted to accessible format
 
  * Type of accessible format they are requesting

Forward the consumer's information along with copies of the document(s) they 
are requesting (preferably in electronic format) to the Commission's 
Accessible Format Specialist, Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-
0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty), fcc504@fcc.gov.  



[Page 40]
5.  AUDIO-VISUAL MEDIA PRODUCED OR OWNED BY THE COMMISSION

Video formats (Videotape, CD, DVD, etc.)

Captioning

* Video media owned or produced by the Commission that is intended for use by 
either staff or the public must be captioned.  The captioning may be either 
open or closed. 

* When video is offered for sale with captions, the Commission must purchase 
the captioned version.  

* For items that are not available for purchase with captions, or for items 
given to the Commission without captions, the Commission must assure that 
captioning will be added at the earliest opportunity.  

* Comments for the record on video that are accompanied by a transcript need 
not be captioned. 

Video description

* Video description is encouraged for visual media held or produced by the 
Commission and will be provided upon request.  Retention and maintenance of 
video described versions of recordings should parallel that of non-video 
described versions. 


Audio recordings

Audio recordings that are owned by the Commission and that are intended for 
use by either staff or the public must have written transcripts available upon 
request.  Transcripts may be produced when requested and need not be prepared 
in advance.  Once produced, however, the retention and maintenance of 
transcripts should parallel that of the audio recording.  


To arrange for captioning or video description or to discuss your media 
options... 

Contact fcc504@fcc.gov or call:

Accessible Format Specialist, Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau
202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 

Section 504 Officer, Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 


[Page 41]
6.  TRAINING

FCC Training

All FCC sponsored training must be accessible to people with disabilities.  
Training announcements should include an accessibility statement. 


Model statement:

Reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities are available upon 
request.  Include a description of the accommodation you will need including 
as much detail as you can.  Also include a way we can contact you if we need 
more information.  Please allow at least 5 days advance notice; last minute 
requests will be accepted, but may be impossible to fill.  Send an e-mail to 
fcc504@fcc.gov or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau:  

For sign language interpreters, CART, and other reasonable accommodations:  
202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (tty) 

For accessible format materials (braille, large print, electronic files, and 
audio format): 202-418-0531 (voice), 202-418-7365 (tty) 




FCC University

To request reasonable accommodations for FCC University courses, contact the 
Chief of the Learning and Development Service Center. *65 


  

[Page 42]
TRAINING (continued)

FCC Contracted training

Entities contracting with the FCC to provide training are obliged to comply 
with the requirements of the Rehabilitation Act *66 and the FCC Section 504 
Rules. *67   It is expected that trainers will: 

* Use only captioned video media whenever possible.

* Comply with reasonable accommodation requests from students including, but 
not limited to: 

  * Providing print materials in braille, large print, or electronic format  
(Materials can be submitted to the Commission's Accessible Format Specialist 
for transcription.) 

  * Reading or describing visual objects, displays, or projections used in 
class 

  * Adjusting the classroom to allow appropriate lines of sight and/or 
physical access. 

  * Provide transcripts of any audio media used in connection with the class. 

  * Distribute any oral quizzes or tests in print format. 

  * Provide print quizzes or tests in audio format. 


External training

Commission employees participating in external training are expected to 
complete FCC Training Form 182e.  Box 9 allows applicants to indicate the 
accommodations needed.  Generally speaking, it is the responsibility of the 
entity offering the training to provide the accommodations.  It is the 
employee's responsibility to make their reasonable accommodation needs known. 



[Page 43]
This page is intentionally blank.



[Page 44]
IV. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCEDURES


[Page 45]
1.  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUESTS

If you receive a request for reasonable accommodations...

That is, a request for services that will allow someone with a disability to 
access the programs and activities of the Commission, IMMEDIATELY forward that 
information to one of the following people.  Be sure to note contact 
information for the requestor (name, telephone number, and/or e-mail address) 
as well as a description of their request.  


If you have questions about--Contact:

Legal Aspects of Disability--Thomas Chandler, Chief, Disability Rights Office, 
Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-1475 / 202-418-0597 tty, 
tchandle@fcc.gov 

Reasonable Accommodations (Sign Language Interpreters, CART (Communication 
Access Realtime Translation), Physical Access), Transcribing sign language 
submitted in video format into English--Helen Chang, Section 504 Officer, 
Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-0424 / 202-418-0432 tty,  
hchang@fcc.gov 

Captioning, Assistive Listening Devices (ALDs)--Daniel Oliver, Audio Visual 
Production Manager, Office of Media Relations, 202-418-0460, doliver@fcc.gov 

Accessible Format (Braille / Large Print / Electronic Files / Audio Format),  
Transcribing documents submitted in accessible format into print--Brian 
Millin, Accessible Format Specialist, Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau, 
202-418-7426 / 202-418-7365 tty, bmillin@fcc.gov 

Section 508 Issues (Access to electronic data, resources, and equipment)--
Rosalind Singleton, Section 508 Officer, Office of Managing Director,
202-418-2850, rlsingle@fcc.gov

Section 501 Issues (Workplace accommodations for FCC staff who have temporary 
or permanent disabilities)--Barbara Douglas, Director, Office of Workplace 
Diversity, 202-418-7589, bjdougla@fcc.gov 


[Page 46]
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUESTS (continued)

If you have questions about--Contact:

Security Issues--Eric Botker, Manager, Security Operations Center, 
202-418-7884, ebotker@fcc.gov (when sending e-mail, please cc: Mary Long, 
mlong@fcc.gov and Richard Blackmon, rblackmo@fcc.gov) 

FCC University--Jerry Liebes, Chief, Learning and Development Service Center,
Office of Managing Director, 202-418-1582, jliebes@fcc.gov 

Other Disability Issues--Helen Chang, Section 504 Officer, Consumer & 
Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-0424 / 202-418-0432 tty, hchang@fcc.gov 



[Page 47]
2.  FCC504@FCC.GOV 
 
Purpose

This is the primary e-mail address for non-FCC staff who would like to request 
accommodations or who would like to direct disability related inquiries to the 
FCC. 

Who checks this mailbox?

Responsibility for checking the mailbox is as follows:

Primary: Section 504 Officer
Secondary: Accessible Format Specialist
Tertiary: Disability Rights Office Sign Language Interpreter


[Page 48]
3.  TTY ACCESS

TTY was originally an acronym for TeleTYpewriter.  Today, these devices are 
sometimes also called TDDs (Telecommunications Devices for the Deaf) or TTs 
(Text Telephones), though the preferred term is still TTY.  TTYs include a 
keyboard, text display, and sometimes a printer.  TTYs allow individuals to 
make and receive telephone calls in realtime using typed, 2-way communication. 

Distribution of TTYs within the Commission--Minimum standards

* Each Division/Office within the Commission should have a working TTY with 
staff trained and available to answer calls.  

* TTY answering machines should be programmed with messages similar to those 
used on voice mail systems. 

* TTYs should be checked regularly for messages with responses generated 
promptly.  Specific individuals should be charged with this task and 
appropriate back-ups designated.  

* The frequency with which TTY answering machines are checked should be 
comparable to checks of the voice mail system. 
 
TTY Telephone numbers

* When contact telephone numbers for the FCC are disseminated, both voice and 
TTY telephone numbers should be included.  

* If an individual, branch, or division designated as the Commission's point 
of contact does not have a TTY number, then the TTY number of their office or 
division must be used.  DO NOT use the general 1-800-TELL-FCC TTY number. *68  

TTY Assistance

* For technical assistance, contact: CRC Help Desk, 202-418-1200 (press 2), 
202-418-0124 tty, crchelp@fcc.gov 

* For help in understanding/translating messages received via TTY, *69 contact 
The Commission's Section 504 Officer. *70 


[Page 49]
TTY ACCESS (continued)

Telecommunications Relay Service (TRS) *71

TRS service (also called Relay, Relay Service, or Relay Center) is mandated by 
Title IV of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) *72 and allows people who 
are deaf, hard of hearing, or who have speech disabilities to use the 
telephone.  TRS service is available 24 hours a day.  It provides the link 
between callers who use assistive devices such as TTYs, and callers who do not 
have such equipment.  It also serves as an interface between people who have 
speech disabilities and those who have difficulty understanding them.  To 
contact TRS, dial 711 anywhere in the United States. *73 The call will be 
connected to an operator (also called a Communications Assistant or CA).  The 
Relay Service will ask for the destination phone number.  Once this 
information has been provided, the call will be placed.  When the connection 
is completed, the CA will relay information between the caller and the call 
recipient.  TRS calls can be of several types: 

TTY calls

TTY users can contact the Relay Center to make calls to people who do not have 
a TTY.  Likewise, callers who use standard telephones can contact the Relay 
Center to make calls to TTY users.  When using the Relay, the TTY user types a 
message to the CA who then reads it to the person using a standard telephone.  
When the person using a standard telephone responds, the CA types the message 
to the TTY user.  

VCO (Voice Carry Over) 

With VCO, a caller who can speak intelligibly but who cannot hear conversation 
on the telephone (as is often the case, for example, with hard of hearing 
people), is able to speak directly with the person using a standard telephone 
on the other end of the line.  The CA then types the standard telephone user's 
comments back to the VCO user via TTY.  Either VCO users or standard telephone 
users can initiate and receive VCO calls. 


[Page 50]
TTY ACCESS -- Telecommunications Relay Service (continued)

HCO (Hearing Carry Over)

HCO allows people who can hear but who cannot speak clearly (for example, 
people who have had severe strokes) to use their hearing via a standard 
telephone while using a TTY to type their comments.  HCO users type their 
comments to the CA who reads them to the person using a standard telephone on 
the other end of the line.  The standard telephone user then speaks directly 
to the HCO user.  Either HCO users or standard telephone users can initiate 
and receive HCO.  


STS (Speech to Speech)

STS services are used by people who have speech disabilities and are neither 
deaf nor hard of hearing (for example, people who have cerebral palsy).  With 
STS, CAs who are trained to understand people who have speech disabilities, 
listen to the caller and then repeat the message clearly to the person being 
called.  The person with the speech disability can be either the initiator or 
the recipient of an STS call. 


IP Relay

IP (Internet Protocol) Relay calls are initiated over the internet.  To locate 
a list of IP Relay providers, use a standard internet search engine and search 
for "IP Relay."  To make an IP Relay call, follow the directions on the 
internet site you select.  At this time, IP Relay can only be used to make 
calls from an internet connection to a standard telephone.  Calls cannot be 
made in reverse -- voice callers using a standard telephone or callers using 
VCO, HCO or STS cannot initiate an IP Relay call.  IP Relay is currently an 
optional service. 


VRS (Video Relay Service)

VRS allows sign language users to send and receive messages in American Sign 
Language (ASL).  Currently, VRS calls must be initiated by the sign language 
user who must also have the appropriate video equipment and high speed 
connectivity, e.g., cable modem, DSL (Digital Subscriber Line), or ISDN 
(Integrated Services Digital Network).  The sign language user signs to a CA 
who is also a qualified sign language interpreter.  The CA interprets the 
message into spoken English for the standard telephone user who then responds 
in spoken English.  The CA listens to the spoken message and interprets it 
into sign language for the originating caller.  At this time VRS is an 
optional service. 



[Page 51]
TTY ACCESS -- Telecommunications Relay Service (continued)

Spanish Relay Service

Relay services must be provided in Spanish for all interstate calls.  Calls 
made within states are not required to offer their services in Spanish though 
many TRS Centers voluntarily do so.  Spanish Relay offers services via TTY, 
VCO, HCO, and IP Relay.  At this time, Spanish Relay is not available for STS 
or Video Relay Service users. Spanish Relay is only required to provide relay 
services from Spanish-to-Spanish; it is not a translation service.  Either 
Spanish Relay users or standard telephone users can initiate and receive 
Spanish Relay calls. 




[Page 52]
4.  DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED IN ALTERNATE FORMATS

Where should they be sent?

Documents that are submitted in alternate formats; i.e., video recording, 
audio recording, braille and the like, should be forwarded immediately to the 
appropriate contact person listed on the chart below. 



For each format below, consult the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau 
contact listed: 

Audio recording: Send to Accessible Format Specialist, 202-418-0531, 202-418-
7365 tty 

Braille: Send to Accessible Format Specialist, 202-418-0531, 202-418-7365 tty

Electronic documents: Send to Accessible Format Specialist, 202-418-0531, 202-
418-7365 tty 

Sign language: Send to Section 504 Officer, 202-418-0530, 202-418-0432 tty

Other media or formats: Send to Section 504 Officer, 202-418-0530, 202-418-
0432 tty 


If you cannot determine what type of media you have received, send it to the 
Section 504 Officer. 



[Page 53]
5.  CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM AUDIO RECORDINGS

Why transcribe audio recordings?

Transcription of audio recordings into other formats may be necessary to allow 
access to the information contained in the recording.  Situations that may 
require such transcription include, but are not limited to, the following: 

* Blind consumers who do not know braille and who do not type or use computers 
may make submissions to the Commission in audio format .  These must be 
transcribed into written form in order to be placed in the record.  (The 
Commission's rules concerning non-discrimination on the basis of disability in 
the Commission's programs and activities *74 state that complaints may be 
submitted in "audio, braille, electronic, and/or video format." *75) 

* FCC staff or members of the public who are deaf may need written transcripts 
of audio recordings in order to benefit from the recording's content. 

* FCC staff or members of the public who are deaf-blind may need to have audio 
recordings transcribed into braille in order to benefit from the recording's 
content.  

Who coordinates the transcription process?

The Accessible Format Specialist *76 is the coordinator and contact person for 
transcription of audio recordings. 


What types of audio recordings are accepted for transcription?

* Audio recordings that are submitted to the Commission by consumers

* Commission audio recordings 

* Audio recordings used in Commission sponsored or approved programs and 
activities. 





[Page 54]
CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM AUDIO RECORDINGS (continued)


Who should create the transcripts?

Transcripts should be created by qualified individuals.  The Accessible Format 
Specialist, or someone the Accessible Format Specialist has evaluated and 
deemed qualified, are appropriate choices. 


Transcription process

* Note the date you receive the audio recording.  There are often deadlines 
for submission of comments, complaints, or information; therefore, the actual 
submittal date can be crucial.  If you are the first point of contact, rather 
than the office that is the official point of receipt, make sure you inform 
the proper office that you have received information in audio format that must 
be transcribed for the record.  Also make sure that you have the full name, 
address, telephone number (or other contact information) for the submitter. 

* Find out if there are specific timelines/deadlines that affect the 
submission in question.  If so, make every effort to complete the transcript 
as quickly as possible so that the entire process will not be unduly delayed.  
Make sure that the administrator of the procedure in question is aware of your 
role in the process and is aware that some flexibility in timing may be 
necessary. 

* Create at least 2 backup copies of the submission in its original format.  
Contact the Audio Visual Center, Office of Media Relations, to schedule this 
service. Copies must be dubbed, so allow ample time for this process. 

* Preserve the original as the master.  During the transcription process, 
retain the original submission as the master since making copies of copies 
produces poorer and poorer results. Use a copy as your working document. 

* Assure that one copy is filed with the appropriate office for the record (if 
applicable) while you are working on the transcript.  Again, be sure that you 
retain the master (original submission) so that copies can be made if your 
working copy breaks or if additional copies are needed. 



[Page 55]
CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM AUDIO RECORDINGS (continued)   

Transcript review

Whenever possible, the completed transcript should be reviewed by another 
qualified person to assure accuracy and completeness. 


Transcript format

* The completed document should be in MS Word using a font style and size that 
is generally acceptable to the Commission. 

* The transcriber's name, the reviewer's name, and the date of completion 
should be noted on the transcript. 


Final disposition

* If this is a document submitted for the record... When the completed 
document is ready for filing, submit the transcript (with the proper number of 
copies) including the original audio recording to the appropriate office. 

* If this document was a request from a person with a disability... Deliver 
the transcript to the requestor using standard Commission methods, i.e., U.S. 
Postal Service, e-mail, etc. 




[Page 56]
6.  CREATING IN-HOUSE WRITTEN TRANSCRIPTS FROM BRAILLE

Why transcribe braille?

The Commission rules concerning non-discrimination on the basis of disability 
in the Commission's programs and activities *77 state that complaints may be 
submitted in "audio, braille, electronic, and/or video format." *78 For 
submissions in braille, transcription is necessary to allow access for people 
who cannot read braille.  


Who coordinates the transcription process?

The Accessible Format Specialist *79 is the coordinator and contact person for 
transcription of braille. 


What types of braille are accepted for transcription?

* English Braille, Grades 1 and 2 *80


Who should create the transcripts?

Braille transcripts should be created by certified braille transcribers. *81  
The Accessible Format Specialist is a certified braille transcriber and the 
primary Commission source for braille transcription.  The Accessible Format 
Specialist may also designate other qualified individuals or organizations to 
provide braille transcription services. 





[Page 57]
CREATING IN-HOUSE WRITTEN TRANSCRIPTS FROM BRAILLE (continued) 


Transcription process

* Note the date you receive the braille document.  There are often deadlines 
for submission of comments, complaints, or information; therefore, the actual 
submittal date can be crucial.  If you are the first point of contact rather 
than the office that is the official point of receipt, make sure you inform 
the proper office that you have received information in braille that must be 
transcribed for the record.  Also make sure that you have the full name, 
address, telephone number (or other contact information) for the submitter. 

* Find out if there are specific timelines/deadlines that affect the 
submission in question.  If so, make every effort to complete the transcript 
as quickly as possible so that the entire process will not be unduly delayed.  
Make sure that the administrator of the procedure in question is aware of your 
role in the process and is aware that some flexibility in timing may be 
necessary. 

* Create at least 2 backup copies of the submission in ink-print format.  

* Preserve the original as the master.  During the transcription process, 
retain the original submission as the master.  For transcribers reading 
braille visually rather than by touch, use an ink-print copy as your working 
document.  For transcribers who are reading braille by touch, produce a 
braille copy for your use if possible.  Otherwise, use extreme care in 
handling the document since it will be the original of record. 

* Assure that one copy is filed with the appropriate office for the record 
while you are working on the transcript.  Again, be sure that you retain the 
original (master).  This will assure that a master copy is available should 
your working copy be destroyed or if additional copies are needed. 


Transcript review

Whenever possible, the completed transcript should be reviewed by another 
qualified person to assure accuracy and completeness. 


Transcript format

* The completed document should be in MS Word using a font style and size that 
is generally acceptable to the Commission. 

* The transcriber's name, the reviewer's name, and the date of completion 
should be noted on the transcript. 




[Page 58]
CREATING IN-HOUSE WRITTEN TRANSCRIPTS FROM BRAILLE (continued) 


Final disposition

When the completed document is ready for filing, submit the transcript (with 
the proper number of copies) including the original braille document to the 
appropriate office. 




[Page 59]
7.  CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM SIGN LANGUAGE VIDEO-RECORDINGS


Why transcribe sign language video recordings?

The Commission rules concerning non-discrimination on the basis of disability 
in the Commission's programs and activities *82 state that complaints may be 
submitted in "audio, braille, electronic, and/or video format." *83  For 
submissions that take the form of American Sign Language recorded in video 
format, a translation and transcription into written English is necessary to 
allow access for people who do not understand American Sign Language. 


Who coordinates the translation / transcription process?

The Section 504 Officer *84 is the contact person and coordinator for sign 
language translation / transcription. 


What visual presentations will be accepted for translation?

American Sign Language (ASL) and its cognates will be accepted for 
translation. *85  The Commission will not attempt to transcribe foreign sign 
languages, International Sign, and other visual, gestural modes of 
presentation. 


Who should create the transcripts?

Translation of ASL to English should be handled by qualified individuals, 
preferably fully certified sign language interpreters. *86  When possible, 
consultation with qualified Deaf sign language users is highly desirable. 



[Page 60]
CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM SIGN LANGUAGE VIDEO RECORDINGS (continued)

Transcription process

* Note the date you receive the video recording.  There are often deadlines 
for submission of comments, complaints, or information; therefore, the actual 
submittal date can be crucial.  If you are the first point of contact rather 
than the office that is the official point of receipt, make sure you inform 
the proper office that you have received information in audio format that must 
be transcribed for the record.  Also make sure that you have the full name, 
address, telephone number (or other contact information) for the submitter. 

* Find out if there are specific timelines/deadlines that affect the 
submission in question.  If so, make every effort to complete the transcript 
as quickly as possible so that the entire process will not be unduly delayed.  
Make sure that the administrator of the procedure in question is aware of your 
role in the process and is aware that some flexibility in timing may be 
necessary. 

* Create at least 2 backup copies of the submission in its original format.  
Contact the Audio Visual Center to schedule this service. Copies are run in 
"real time" so allow ample time for this process. 

* Preserve the original as the master.  During the transcription process, 
retain the original submission as the master since making copies of copies 
produces poorer and poorer results. Use a copy as your working document. 

* Assure that one copy is filed with the appropriate office for the record 
while you are working on the translation.  Always retain the original 
submission as the master since making copies of copies produces poorer and 
poorer results. Use a copy as your working document. 


Translation process

* Strike as much balance as possible between:

  * Being accurate and complete

    - Remember that this is a transcript.  

    - Include false starts if signs are actually formed.  Pauses or handshapes 
that begin but never finish need not be recorded. 

    - Ellipses (...) can be used to indicate abrupt changes and pauses like 
those in false starts. 



[Page 61]
CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM SIGN LANGUAGE VIDEO RECORDINGS (continued)


and

* Trying to convey the message as the person who is deaf intends it without 
undue embellishment.  If there is an obvious slip on the part of the speaker, 
a word mis-spoken, left out, etc., an editorial comment in brackets may be 
used.  For example:  My reason for coming to the [Federal] Communications 
Commission is to let you know about my experiences with TRS. 

* Use judgment when dealing with fingerspelling. Fingerspelling that is 
incidentally incorrect [equivalent to typos] need not be noted, but 
fingerspelling that is intentionally presented but does not clearly match the 
context of the statement should be noted.  Possible interpretations should be 
noted in [brackets].  If fingerspelling is completely unreadable, note in the 
document, [unintelligible]. 

* Try to match register and language level as much as possible while still 
retaining meaning.  

EXAMPLE:

  - RECENT.  FCC GROUP CHANGE.  SWITCH-SWITCH-SWITCH.  OFFICE MOVE 4th FLOOR 
ME. 

Possible renderings:

  - Recently, the FCC's organizational structure was revamped.  One of the 
many changes included the relocation of my office to the 4th floor. 

  - With the recent change in FCC structure, my office moved to the 4th floor. 

  - FCC just reorganized.  My office is now on the 4th floor. 

  - FCC's changed a lot. I'm on the 4th floor now. 

* Note unrecognizable signs that interrupt the flow of discourse. Use the 
notation, [unknown sign], in the document to clearly differentiate it from the 
actual text.  If signs are recognizable, but meaning is not discernable, gloss 
as much of the comment as possible enclosing the glosses in {curly braces}.  
At the beginning of the transcript include a note explaining the use of 
[braces] and {curly braces} as well as any other conventions employed in the 
document. 



[Page 62]
CREATING IN-HOUSE TRANSCRIPTS FROM SIGN LANGUAGE VIDEO RECORDINGS (continued)


Translation review

Whenever possible, the completed translation should be reviewed by another 
qualified person to assure accuracy and completeness. 


Translation format

* The completed document should be in MS Word using a font that is generally 
acceptable to the Commission. 

* The translator's name, the reviewer's name, and the date of completion 
should be noted on the transcript. 


Final disposition

When the completed document is ready for filing, submit the translation (with 
the number of copies required) along with the original video recording to the 
appropriate office. 



[Page 63]
V. DISABILITY PRIMER



[Page 64]

1.  DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS


Rehabilitation Act, Section 504

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (PL 93-112, September 26, 1973) *87 and its 
subsequent amendments are precursors to the more well-known Americans with 
Disabilities Act that was passed in 1990.  Originally, Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act was intended to eliminate discrimination against people 
with disabilities in programs or activities receiving Federal funding.  
Section 504 provided the following: 

Sec. 504.  No otherwise qualified handicapped individual in the United States, 
as defined in Section 7 (6), shall, solely by reason of his handicap, be 
excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected 
to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial 
assistance. 

In 1978, the "Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental 
Disabilities Amendments of 1978"  (PL 95-602, November 6, 1978) *88 was passed 
broadening the scope of Section 504 to include the Executive Branch Agencies 
of the Federal Government.  As amended, Section 504 reads as follows (the 
language added in the amendment is underlined): 

Sec. 504.  No otherwise qualified handicapped individual in the United States, 
as defined in Section 7 (6), shall, solely by reason of his handicap, be 
excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected 
to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial 
assistance or under any program or activity conducted by any Executive agency 
or by the United States Postal Service.  The head of each such agency shall 
promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the amendments to 
this section made by the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and 
Developmental Disabilities Act of 1978.  Copies of any proposed regulation 
shall be submitted to appropriate authorizing committees of Congress, and such 
regulation may take effect no earlier than the thirtieth day after the date on 
which such regulation is so submitted to such committees. 



[Page 65]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS - Rehabilitation Act, Section 504 (continued)

As a result, each Federal agency has its own set of section 504 regulations 
that apply to its own programs and activities. Agencies that provide Federal 
financial assistance also have Section 504 regulations covering entities that 
receive such funding. 

Requirements common to Federal agency Section 504 regulations include 
reasonable accommodation for employees with disabilities; program 
accessibility; effective communication with people who have hearing or vision 
disabilities; and accessible new construction and alterations. Each agency is 
responsible for enforcing its own regulations. Section 504 may also be 
enforced through private lawsuits. *89 

On April 15, 1987 the Federal Communications Commission released its Report 
and Order *90 (R&O), Amendment of Part 1 of the Commission's Rules to Implement 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as Amended, 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794.  
In the R&O, the Commission adopted with minor modifications the Department of 
Justice's prototype regulations for implementing and enforcing Section 504.  

In 2003, the Commission released an Order amending its Section 504 
regulations. *91  The amendment updated the language in the Commission's rules 
and added the Section 504 Handbook to its implementation of the Section 504 
requirements. 

In addition to Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, there are other Federal 
laws that address disability issues.  The following is a brief description of 
some of the laws that are frequently mentioned in connection with topics of 
interest to the FCC. 




[Page 66]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS (continued)  

Rehabilitation Act

Section 501 *92 

"Section 501 requires affirmative action and nondiscrimination in employment 
by Federal agencies of the executive branch." *93 


Section 503 *94

"Section 503 requires affirmative action and prohibits employment 
discrimination by Federal government contractors and subcontractors with 
contracts of more than $10,000." *95 


Section 508 *96

"Section 508 establishes requirements for electronic and information 
technology developed, maintained, procured, or used by the Federal government. 
Section 508 requires Federal electronic and information technology to be 
accessible to people with disabilities, including employees and members of the 
public. 

An accessible information technology system is one that can be operated in a 
variety of ways and does not rely on a single sense or ability of the user. 
For example, a system that provides output only in visual format may not be 
accessible to people with visual impairments, and a system that provides 
output only in audio format may not be accessible to people who are deaf or 
hard of hearing. Some individuals with disabilities may need accessibility-
related software or peripheral devices in order to use systems that comply 
with Section 508." *97 




[Page 67]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS (continued) 


Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) *98

"The ADA prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in employment, 
State and local government, public accommodations, commercial facilities, 
transportation, and telecommunications. It also applies to the United States 
Congress. 

To be protected by the ADA, one must have a disability or have a relationship 
or association with an individual with a disability. An individual with a 
disability is defined by the ADA as a person who has a physical or mental 
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a 
person who has a history or record of such an impairment, or a person who is 
perceived by others as having such an impairment. The ADA does not 
specifically name all of the impairments that are covered." *99 


ADA Title I: Employment *100

"Title I requires employers with 15 or more employees to provide qualified 
individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to benefit from the full 
range of employment-related opportunities available to others. For example, it 
prohibits discrimination in recruitment, hiring, promotions, training, pay, 
social activities, and other privileges of employment. It restricts questions 
that can be asked about an applicant's disability before a job offer is made, 
and it requires that employers make reasonable accommodation to the known 
physical or mental limitations of otherwise qualified individuals with 
disabilities, unless it results in undue hardship." *101 


ADA Title II: State and Local Government Activities *102

"Title II covers all activities of State and local governments regardless of 
the government entity's size or receipt of Federal funding. Title II requires 
that State and local governments give people with disabilities an equal 
opportunity to benefit from all of their programs, services, and activities 
(e.g. public education, 



[Page 68]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS- ADA Title II: State & Local Government Activities 
(continued) 

employment, transportation, recreation, health care, social services, courts, 
voting, and town meetings). 

State and local governments are required to follow specific architectural 
standards in the new construction and alteration of their buildings. They also 
must relocate programs or otherwise provide access in inaccessible older 
buildings, and communicate effectively with people who have hearing, vision, 
or speech disabilities. Public entities are not required to take actions that 
would result in undue financial and administrative burdens. They are required 
to make reasonable modifications to policies, practices, and procedures where 
necessary to avoid discrimination, unless they can demonstrate that doing so 
would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity 
being provided." *103 


ADA Title II: Public Transportation *104 

"The transportation provisions of title II cover public transportation 
services, such as city buses and public rail transit (e.g. subways, commuter 
rails, Amtrak). Public transportation authorities may not discriminate against 
people with disabilities in the provision of their services. They must comply 
with requirements for accessibility in newly purchased vehicles, make good 
faith efforts to purchase or lease accessible used buses, remanufacture buses 
in an accessible manner, and, unless it would result in an undue burden, 
provide paratransit where they operate fixed-route bus or rail systems. 
Paratransit is a service where individuals who are unable to use the regular 
transit system independently (because of a physical or mental impairment) are 
picked up and dropped off at their destinations." *105 




[Page 69]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS- ADA (continued)

ADA Title III: Public Accommodations *106

"Title III covers businesses and nonprofit service providers that are public 
accommodations, privately operated entities offering certain types of courses 
and examinations, privately operated transportation, and commercial 
facilities. Public accommodations are private entities who own, lease, lease 
to, or operate facilities such as restaurants, retail stores, hotels, movie 
theaters, private schools, convention centers, doctors' offices, homeless 
shelters, transportation depots, zoos, funeral homes, day care centers, and 
recreation facilities including sports stadiums and fitness clubs. 
Transportation services provided by private entities are also covered by 
[T]itle III. 

Public accommodations must comply with basic nondiscrimination requirements 
that prohibit exclusion, segregation, and unequal treatment. They also must 
comply with specific requirements related to architectural standards for new 
and altered buildings; reasonable modifications to policies, practices, and 
procedures; effective communication with people with hearing, vision, or 
speech disabilities; and other access requirements. Additionally, public 
accommodations must remove barriers in existing buildings where it is easy to 
do so without much difficulty or expense, given the public accommodation's 
resources. 

Courses and examinations related to professional, educational, or trade-
related applications, licensing, certifications, or credentialing must be 
provided in a place and manner accessible to people with disabilities, or 
alternative accessible arrangements must be offered. 

Commercial facilities, such as factories and warehouses, must comply with the 
ADA's architectural standards for new construction and alterations." *107 


ADA Title IV: Telecommunications Relay Services *108

"Title IV addresses telephone and television access for people with hearing 
and speech disabilities. It requires common carriers (telephone companies) to 
establish interstate and intrastate telecommunications relay services (TRS) 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week. TRS enables callers with hearing and speech 
disabilities who use telecommunications devices for the deaf (TDDs), which are 




[Page 70]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS- ADA Title IV: Telecommunications Relay Service 
(continued) 

also known as teletypewriters (TTYs), and callers who use voice telephones to 
communicate with each other through a third party communications assistant. 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has set minimum standards for TRS 
services.  Title IV also requires closed captioning of Federally funded public 
service announcements." *109, *110  


Architectural Barriers Act *111

"The Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) requires that buildings and facilities 
that are designed, constructed, or altered with Federal funds, or leased by a 
Federal agency, comply with Federal standards for physical accessibility. ABA 
requirements are limited to architectural standards in new and altered 
buildings and in newly leased facilities. They do not address the activities 
conducted in those buildings and facilities. Facilities of the U.S. Postal 
Service are covered by the ABA." *112 



Telecommunications Act

Sections 255 and 251 *113

"Section 255 and Section 251(a)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934, as 
amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, require manufacturers of 
telecommunications equipment and providers of telecommunications services to 
ensure that such equipment and services are accessible to and usable by 
persons with disabilities, if readily achievable. These amendments ensure that 
people with disabilities will have access to a broad range of products and 
services such as telephones, cell phones, pagers, call-waiting, and operator 
services, that were often inaccessible to many users with disabilities." *114, 
*115 





[Page 71]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS  -- Telecommunications Act (continued)

Section 713 *116

Section 713 empowered the FCC to develop rules that would regulate the 
provision of television closed captioning services. It also charged the 
Commission to examine issues surrounding the provision of television video 
description services so as to "ensure the accessibility of video programming 
to persons with visual impairments, and to report to Congress on its 
findings." *117 

As a result, the Commission issued rules requiring captioning of television 
programs *118 as well as rules requiring that certain major broadcast and 
cable television stations provide video description for 50 hours of 
programming per calendar quarter. *119  However, in a decision released 
November 8, 2002, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held 
that Section 713 did not give the FCC authority to enact video description 
rules.  In its conclusion, the Court decided to "reverse and vacate the 
Commission's Order insofar as it requires broadcasters to implement video 
description." *120 


Television Decoder Circuitry Act *121

The Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990 requires that beginning July 1, 
1993, all television sets with screens 13 inches or larger, either made or 
imported for use in the United States, have built-in decoder circuitry that 
allows it to display closed captioning. 


Hearing Aid Compatibility Act *122

The Hearing Aid Compatibility Act requires that all telephones, including 
cordless telephones, manufactured or imported for use in the U.S. be hearing 
aid compatible.  Secure telephones are exempt, as are telephones used with 
public mobile services or private radio services.  A telephone is hearing aid 
compatible if it provides internal 



[Page 72]
DISABILITY RIGHTS LAWS  -- Hearing Aid Compatibility Act (continued) 

means (i.e., without the use of external devices) for effective use with 
hearing aids that are designed to be compatible with telephones that meet 
established technical standards for hearing aid compatibility. *123 



[Page 73]
2. Disability Statistics


The following chart, based on U.S. Census statistics from 1997, indicates the 
prevalence of selected disabilities in the United States among individuals age 
15 and older.  The information reflected in this chart is based on the Census 
Bureau's SIPP (Survey of Income and Program Participation).  

"The [SIPP] survey design is a continuous series of national panels, with 
sample size ranging from approximately 14,000 to 36,700 interviewed 
households. The duration of each panel ranges from 2 1/2 years to 4 years. The 
SIPP sample is a multistage-stratified sample of the U.S. civilian 
noninstitutionalized population. For the 1984-1993 panels, a panel of 
households was introduced each year in February. A 4-year panel was introduced 
in April 1996. A 2000 panel was introduced in February 2000 for 2 waves. A 3-
year 2001 panel was introduced in February 2001." *124 


Categories of individuals               # in thousands          % distribution

Individuals with a disability           47,935                  23.0

Individuals with:

   Difficulty seeing words/letters      7,673                   3.7
   Difficulty hearing conversation      7,966                   3.8
   Difficulty with speech               2,270                   1.1
   Difficulty walking/using stairs      25,138                  12.1
      Used a wheelchair                 2,155                   1.0
      Used a cane/crutches/walker       6,372                   3.1
   Mental disability                    14,267                  6.9
      Learning disability               3,451                   1.7
      Mental retardation                1,366                   0.7
      Alzheimer's/senility/dementia     1,873                   0.9
      Other mental/emotional condition  3,418                   1.6

Source: August-November 1997 data from the Survey of Income and Program 
Participation *125 




[Page 74]
3. Disability Terminology *126

The disability community generally emphasizes the individuality of  people 
with disabilities, not their disability. The term "handicapped" has fallen 
into disuse and should be avoided. The terms "able-bodied," "physically 
challenged" and "differently abled" are also discouraged. The following are 
some recommendations: 

Never use the article "THE" with an adjective to describe people with 
disabilities. The preferred usage, "people with disabilities," stresses the 
essential humanity of individuals and avoids objectification. Alternatively, 
the term "disabled people" is acceptable, but still defines individuals as 
disabled, first, and people second."  The term "hearing impaired" should also 
be used with caution as it is perceived by many to be a term that implies that 
the individual is in some way "broken" and needs to be "fixed."  Instead, the 
term, "deaf or hard of hearing," can be used. 


Use: People who are deaf, People who are hard of hearing, People who are deaf 
or hard of hearing 
Not: the deaf, deaf-mutes, deaf and dumb

Use: People who are blind, People with low vision, People who are visually 
impaired 
Not: the visually impaired

Use: People with disabilities
Not: the disabled


To refer to a person's disability, choose the correct terminology for the 
specific disability.  The following terms are examples of appropriate terms to 
describe people with disabilities. 

People who are: blind, visually impaired, deaf, hard of hearing, mentally 
retarded. People with, or who have: Cerebral Palsy, Down's Syndrome, mental 
illness, paraplegia, quadriplegia, partial hearing loss, seizure disorder, 
specific learning disability, speech impairment, speech disability. 




[Page 75]
DISABILITY TERMINOLOGY (continued)


Be careful not to imply that people with disabilities are to be pitied, feared 
or ignored, or that they are somehow more heroic, courageous, patient, or 
"special" than others. Never use the term "normal" in contrast. 

Use: Trina qualified for her "Swimmer" certificate.
Not: Trina held her own while swimming with normal children.


A person in a wheelchair is a "wheelchair user" or "uses a wheelchair." Avoid 
terms that define the disability as a limitation such as "confined to a 
wheelchair" or "wheelchair-bound." A wheelchair liberates; it doesn't confine. 

Never use the terms "victim" or "sufferer" to refer to a person who has had a 
disease or disability. This term dehumanizes the person and emphasizes 
powerlessness. 


Use: person with HIV/AIDS
Not: victim of AIDS or AIDS sufferer.

Use: had polio 
Not: polio victim




[Page 76]
4.  DISABILITY ETIQUETTE *127

General etiquette

* When talking with a person with a disability, speak directly to that person 
rather than to a companion or sign language interpreter who may be present. 

* When introduced to a person with a disability, it is appropriate to offer to 
shake hands. People with limited hand use or who wear an artificial limb can 
usually shake hands. Shaking hands with the left hand is an acceptable 
greeting. 

* When meeting a person with a visual impairment, always identify yourself and 
others who may be with you. When conversing in a group, remember to identify 
the person to whom you are speaking. 

* If you offer assistance, wait until the offer is accepted. Then listen to or 
ask for instructions. 

* Treat adults as adults. Address people who have disabilities by their first 
names only when extending that same familiarity to all others present. Never 
patronize people who use wheelchairs by patting them on the head or shoulder. 

* Leaning or hanging on a person's wheelchair is similar to leaning or hanging 
on a person and is generally considered annoying. The chair is part of the 
personal body space of the person who uses it. 

* Listen attentively when you're talking with a person who has difficulty 
speaking. Be patient and wait for the person to finish, rather than correcting 
or speaking for that person. If necessary, ask short questions that require 
short answers, a nod, or a shake of the head. Never pretend to understand if 
you are having difficulty doing so. Instead, repeat what you have understood 
and allow the person to respond. The response will clue you in and guide your 
understanding. 

* When speaking with a person in a wheelchair or a person who uses crutches, 
place yourself at eye level in front of the person to facilitate the 
conversation. 

* To get the attention of a person who is deaf or hard of hearing, tap the 
person on the shoulder or wave your hand. Look directly at the person and 
speak clearly. Not all 

 


[Page 77]
DISABILITY ETIQUETTE -- General etiquette (continued)

people who are deaf or hard of hearing can speechread.  For those who do 
speechread, be sensitive to their needs by placing yourself facing the light 
source and keeping hands, cigarettes, and food away from your mouth when 
speaking. 

* Relax. It's okay if you happen to use accepted, common expressions, such as 
"See you later" or "Did you hear about this," that seem to relate to the 
person's disability. 




[Page 78]
DISABILITY ETIQUETTE (continued)


Sensitivity to Blindness and Visual Impairments *128

The following points of etiquette are helpful to keep in mind when interacting 
with a person who is blind or visually impaired.  

* Introduce yourself to people who are blind or visually impaired using your 
name and/or position, especially if you are wearing a name badge containing 
this information. 

* Speak directly to people who are blind or visually impaired, not through a 
companion, guide, or other individual. 

* Speak to people who are blind or visually impaired using a natural 
conversational tone and speed. 

* Address people who are totally blind or severely visually impaired by name 
when possible.  This is especially important in crowded areas. 

* Immediately greet people who are blind or visually impaired when they enter 
a room or a service area.  This allows you to let them know you are present 
and ready to assist.  It also eliminates uncomfortable silences. 

* Indicate the end of a conversation with a person who is totally blind or 
severely visually impaired to avoid the embarrassment of having them continue 
speaking when no one is actually there. 

* Feel free to use words that refer to vision during the course of 
conversations with people who are blind or visually impaired.  Vision-oriented 
words such as look, see, and watching TV are a part of everyday verbal 
communication.  The words blind and visually impaired are also acceptable in 
conversation.  

* Be precise and thorough when you describe individuals, places, or things to 
people who are totally blind.  Don't leave things out or change a description 
because you think it is unimportant or unpleasant.  It is also important to 
refer to specific people or items by name or title instead of general terms 
like "you", or "they" or "this." 



[Page 79]
DISABILITY ETIQUETTE (continued) -- Sensitivity to Blindness and Visual 
Impairments (continued) 

* Feel free to use visually descriptive language.  Making reference to colors, 
patterns, designs, and shapes is perfectly acceptable. 

* Speak about a person with a disability by first referring to the person and 
then to the disability.  Refer to "people who are blind" rather than to "blind 
people." 

* Offer to guide people who are blind or visually impaired by asking if they 
would like assistance.  Offer them your arm.  It is not always necessary to 
provide guided assistance; in some instances it can be disorienting and 
disruptive. Respect the desires of the person you are with. 

* Guide people who request assistance by allowing them to take your arm just 
above the elbow when your arm is bent.  Walk ahead of the person you are 
guiding. Never grab a person who is blind or visually impaired by the arm and 
push him/her forward.   

* Guide dogs are working mobility tools.  Do not pet them, feed them, or 
distract them while they are working. 

* Do not leave a person who is blind or visually impaired standing in "free 
space" when you serve as a guide. Always be sure that the person you guide has 
a firm grasp on your arm, or is leaning against a chair or a wall if you have 
to be separated momentarily. 

* Be calm and clear about what to do if you see a person who is blind or 
visually impaired about to encounter a dangerous situation. For example, if a 
person who is blind is about to bump into a stanchion in a hotel lobby, calmly 
and firmly call out, "Wait there for a moment; there is a pole in front of 
you." 



[Page 80]
DISABILITY ETIQUETTE (continued)


Interacting with people who have speech disabilities *129

There are a variety of disabilities, such as stroke, cerebral palsy, and 
deafness that may involve speech impairments.  People with speech disabilities 
communicate in many different ways. 

* People who have speech disabilities may use a variety of ways to 
communicate. The individual may choose to use American Sign Language, write, 
speak, use a communication device, or a combination of methods. Find out the 
person's preferred method and use it. 

* Be appropriate when speaking with a person with a speech disability. Never 
assume that the person has a cognitive disability just because he or she has 
difficulty speaking. 

* Move away from a noisy source and try to find a quiet environment for 
communicating with the person. 

* If the person with a speech disability has a companion or attendant, talk 
directly to the person. Do not ask the companion about the person. 

* Listen attentively when you are talking with a person who has difficulty 
speaking. Be patient and wait for the person to finish, rather than correcting 
or speaking for the person. If necessary, ask short questions that require 
short answers, a nod, or shake of the head. 

* If you do not understand what the person has said, do not pretend that you 
did. Ask the person to repeat it. Smiling and nodding when you have no idea 
what the person said is embarrassing to both parties. Instead, repeat what you 
have understood and allow the person to respond. 

* When you have difficulty conversing on the telephone with the person, 
suggest the use of a speech-to-speech relay service so that a trained 
professional can help you communicate with the person. Either you or the 
person can initiate the call free of charge via the relay service. 




[Page 81]
DISABILITY ETIQUETTE -- Interacting with people who have speech disabilities 
(continued) 


* If the person uses a communication device, make sure it is within his or her 
reach. If there are instructions visible for communicating with the person, 
take a moment to read them. 

* Do not make assumptions about what a person can or cannot do based on his 
disability. All people with disabilities are different and have a wide variety 
of skills and personalities. 





[Page 82]
5.  SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS


When using an interpreter...

* Speak clearly in a normal tone and at a natural pace; do not exaggerate lip 
movements (if the person who is deaf or hard of hearing has speechreading 
skills, exaggerated mouth movements will distort rather than enhance 
understanding).  

* Make sure there is adequate lighting.  Avoid lighting that places a shadow 
on the interpreter or that makes it difficult to see the interpreter's hands 
and face - for example, in front of a window or with bright or glaring light 
placed behind the interpreter. 

* If possible, position the interpreter so that the person who is deaf or hard 
of hearing can see both the interpreter and the speaker.  

* If speakers during your event are likely to use acronyms, jargon, or 
vocabulary peculiar to your field, it is helpful to provide the interpreter 
with a list of such terms and their definitions. 

* Speak directly to the person who is deaf or hard of hearing and avoid 
phrases like, "tell him" or "ask her." 

* Maintain eye contact with the person who is deaf or hard of hearing, not 
with the interpreter.  It may help to remind yourself that your conversation 
is with the person who is deaf or hard of hearing, not with the interpreter.  
This may seem difficult at first because you will hear the interpreter's voice 
and will see the person who is deaf or hard of hearing shifting his gaze 
between you and the interpreter.  Keep in mind that the person who is deaf or 
hard of hearing must look at the interpreter in order to understand what you 
are saying.  

* Realize that the interpreter is speaking for the person who is deaf or hard 
of hearing.  When the interpreter says, "I" or "me," she is speaking as the 
person who is deaf or hard of hearing, not as herself. 

* Do not attempt to have private conversations with a working interpreter.  It 
is the job of the interpreter to convey everything that is said or heard, 
including your efforts at engaging her attention. 




[Page 83]
SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS-- When using an interpreter (continued)

* In large gatherings where microphones are used, make sure that the 
interpreters providing sign to voice interpretation have a microphone and are 
placed with a clear line of sight, in front of the speaker who is deaf or hard 
of hearing.  

* Situations requiring one or more hours of interpreting may call for more 
than one interpreter.  A team of two interpreters helps reduce the possibility 
of errors and lessens the likelihood of injury due to the stressful repetitive 
motions required by interpreting.  When interpreters work as a team, they will 
generally switch roles every twenty to thirty minutes. 

* If you are in doubt as to the best arrangements for your situation, ask the 
interpreters and the people who are deaf and hard of hearing.  They are the 
experts on what will work best for them. 



Study of fatigue confirms need for working in teams *130

"[M]ost people do not realize that an interpreter uses at least 22 cognitive 
skills when interpreting,' states Patricia Michelsen in an article published 
in The Court Management and Administration Report. Other studies of 
simultaneous interpretation have shown that fatigue is exacerbated by 
environmental factors that interfere with various aspects of the cognitive 
process... 

While these studies make an important contribution to the body of scientific 
data needed for a better understanding of the interpreting process and its 
complexities, they merely corroborate what practicing interpreters have known 
and argued all along: that work quality - i.e., accuracy and coherence - 
begins to deteriorate after approximately 30 minutes of sustained simultaneous 
interpreting, and that the only way to ensure a faithful rendition of legal 
proceedings is to provide interpreters with adequate relief at approximately 
half-hour intervals. 

Conscientious administrators in several federal courts, the United Nations and 
the U.S. State Department recognized the need for tandem interpreting adopted 
the practice early on.  Team interpreting, in fact, dates back to the 
Nuremberg trials.  At the State Department, which according to Harry Obst, 
Director of the Office of Language Services, handles 200 to 300 interpreting 
missions in 100 different locations per day, it is considered an inviolable 
policy.  In response to a request from Ed Baca of the 



[Page 84]
SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS-- Study of fatigue confirms need for working in 
teams (continued) 

Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, Obst pointed out that 'The policy on 
simultaneous interpreters is simple and corresponds to that of all other 
responsible interpreting services in the entire world (United Nations, 
European Commission, International Red Cross, International Court of Justice, 
foreign ministries in other nations.)  No individual simultaneous interpreter 
is allowed to work for more than 30 minutes at a time.'  The letter continues, 
'This is also done for the protection of the users.  After 30 minutes the 
accuracy and completeness of simultaneous interpreters decrease precipitously, 
falling off by about 10% every 5 minutes after holding a satisfactory plateau 
for half an hour.'  The reason, Obst explains, is that 'The human mind cannot 
hold the needed level of focused concentration any longer than that.  This 
fact has been demonstrated in millions of hours of simultaneous interpretation 
around the world since 1948.  It is not a question of opinion.  It is simply 
the result of empirical observation.'" *131 



Code of Ethics (Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf) *132

The Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Inc. [RID] is the national 
professional association for sign language interpreters in the United States.  
RID maintains and administers the certifying examination system for 
interpreters nationwide.  RID has set forth the following principles of 
ethical behavior to protect and guide interpreters, transliterators, and 
hearing and deaf consumers of interpreting services. Underlying these 
principles is the desire to ensure the right to communicate for all. 

This Code of Ethics applies to all members of the Registry of Interpreters for 
the Deaf, Inc. and to all certified non-members. 

1. Interpreters/transliterators shall keep all assignment-related information 
strictly confidential. 

2. Interpreters/transliterators shall render the message faithfully, always 
conveying the content and spirit of the speaker using language most readily 
understood by the person(s) whom they serve. 



[Page 85]
SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS-Code of Ethics (continued)


3. Interpreters/transliterators shall not counsel, advise or interject 
personal opinions. 

4. Interpreters/transliterators shall accept assignments using discretion with 
regard to skill, setting, and the consumers involved. 

5. Interpreters/transliterators shall request compensation for services in a 
professional and judicious manner. 

6. Interpreters/transliterators shall function in a manner appropriate to the 
situation. 

7. Interpreters/transliterators shall strive to further knowledge and skills 
through participation in work-shops, professional meetings, interaction with 
professional colleagues, and reading of current literature in the field. 

Interpreters/transliterators, by virtue of membership or certification by the 
RID, Inc., shall strive to maintain high professional standards in compliance 
with the Code of Ethics. 



[Page 86]
6.  Assistive Listening Devices *133

Assistive listening devices (ALDs) increase the volume of a desired sound, 
such as the soundtrack of a movie or the voice of a tour guide, without 
increasing the loudness of background noises. Some assistive listening devices 
are also used to convey audio descriptions to visitors with visual impairments 

It is estimated that one out of every 10 people in the U.S. has a significant 
hearing loss, ranging from 25 dB (mild) to 90 dB (severe). About half of them 
are older adults. Among people with hearing loss, some wear hearing aids or 
use other devices to enhance what hearing they have, and some read lips. 

ALDs are made up of two parts: the transmitter and the receiver. The 
transmitter picks up the sound and converts it to a signal, which it then 
sends out. The receiver picks up a signal and transmits it to the user. 
Several receivers can pick up the signal from a single transmitter. 

There are several types of ALD systems: 

Infrared systems transmit sounds via light waves to users wearing receivers. 
The receiver must be in the transmitter's line of sight to function properly. 
This limits where listeners with receivers can be located, but it also 
prevents spillover of sound into other areas. Sunlight and bright incandescent 
light interfere with the transmitter signal, so an IR system may not be a good 
choice for outdoors. IR systems are often used in movies, conferences, and 
live performances. 

FM systems transmit sounds via radio waves. With this system, the speaker 
wears a compact microphone and transmitter while the listener has a portable 
receiver with headphones or earphones. FM systems are commonly used when the 
speaker is required to move around. This system is not affected by light, but 
may experience radio interference. The same system can serve multiple uses 
(e.g. translations, audio descriptions, etc.) because it can transmit and 
receive multiple frequencies. *134 




[Page 87]
ASSISTIVE LISTENING DEVICES (continued) 

Inductive or audio loop systems transmit sounds using an electromagnetic 
field. A special amplifier and microphone used by the speaker send signals 
through a loop of wire installed around the listening area. Hearing aids 
equipped with telecoil circuits receive these signals and transmit them as 
sound to the listener. Listeners who do not have hearing aids or telecoil 
circuits can use receivers that pick up the signal. 





[Page 88]

7.  CART (Communication Access Realtime Translation) *135


What is it?

Communication Access Realtime Translation (CART) is a word-for-word speech-to-
text interpreting service for people who need communication access. Unlike 
computerized notetaking or abbreviation systems, which summarize information 
for consumers, CART provides a complete translation of all spoken words and 
environmental sounds, empowering consumers to decide for themselves what 
information is important to them. CART consumers include people with hearing 
loss; individuals with cognitive or motor challenges; anyone desiring to 
improve reading/language skills; and those with other communication barriers. 
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) specifically recognizes CART as an 
assistive technology that affords effective communication access. 


How it's done

A CART provider uses a steno machine, notebook computer, and realtime software 
to render instant speech-to-text translation on a computer monitor or other 
display for the benefit of an individual consumer or larger group in a number 
of settings: classrooms; business, government, and educational functions; 
courtrooms; religious, civic, cultural, recreation, or entertainment events. A 
CART provider is sensitive to the varying needs of consumers and has had 
training in conveying a speaker's message, complete with environmental cues. 
This expertise distinguishes a CART provider from a court reporter in a 
traditional litigation setting. 

Certification

NCRA's Registered Professional Reporter (RPR) designation is nationally 
recognized and at this time is considered a requisite for CART providers. 
Attainment of the Certified Realtime Reporter (CRR) designation is 
recommended. 




[Page 89]

8.  CAPTIONING

What is Captioning?

Captioning is the transcription and subsequent text display of dialog and 
other auditory information, such as on- and off-screen sound effects, music, 
and laughter. Captioning is used in many places including videos and films, 
live performances and demonstrations, lectures, web sites, and television. 

Captioning benefits are not limited to people who are deaf or hard of hearing.  
In loud, crowded venues as well as hushed, quite settings, captioned video 
allows sighted visitors to read what they cannot hear. Captions also benefit 
new readers and people who are learning English as a second language. *136 

There are two categories of captions: 

CLOSED captions are captions that are hidden in the video signal and are 
invisible without a special decoder. They are hidden in an area that is called 
line 21 of the vertical blanking interval (VBI). 

OPEN captions are captions that have been decoded, so they have become an 
integral part of the television picture, like subtitles in a movie. Open 
captions cannot be turned off. The term "open captions" is also used to refer 
to subtitles created with a character generator. *137 



[Page 90] 
CAPTIONING (continued)

Caption Styles *138

There are three ways that captions can be presented to a viewer: 

Roll-up captions are used almost exclusively for live events. The words appear 
one at a time at the end of the line, and when a line is filled, it rolls up 
to make room for a new line. Older decoders can only display roll-up captions 
at the bottom of the screen. Newer ones can place captions wherever the 
captioner wants them. 

Pop-on captions are the standard for pre-taped material. The entire caption 
appears, all at once, anywhere on the screen. When a pop-on caption appears, 
all captions previously on the screen are erased. 

Paint-on captions are free-form in their positioning, like pop-on captions, 
but they don't erase what was already on the screen. The name comes from the 
way they are drawn on the screen a letter at a time, so you can see them 
"paint on" to the screen. They are not used much yet, except for commercials 
and special effects. 


How are realtime [live] captions generated? *139 

Realtime [live] captions are performed by stenocaptioners, who are court 
reporters with special training. They use a special keyboard (called a "steno 
keyboard" or "shorthand machine") to write what they hear as they hear it. 
Unlike a traditional "QWERTY" keyboard, a steno keyboard allows more than one 
key to be pressed at a time. The basic concept behind machine shorthand is 
phonetic, where combinations of keys represent sounds, but the actual theory 
used is much more complex than straight phonics. 

Stenocaptioners are capable of writing at speeds of up to 250 words per 
minute, or even faster in short bursts. 

The steno keyboard is connected to a computer system where the captioning 
software formats the stream of steno characters into captions and sends it to 
a caption encoder. This can be done either directly or through telephone 
modems. 



[Page 91]
CAPTIONING (continued)

Methods of captioning *140

* Stenocaptioning

Live captions are usually displayed in three lines rolling up from the bottom 
of the screen and are produced by "stenocaptioners" who listen to the show as 
it airs, typing the words in code on a shorthand keyboard.  With live 
captioning, a few errors are unavoidable. 

Stenocaptioners prepare for live programs ahead of time by updating their 
"dictionaries" with phonetic symbols or "briefs" for anticipated names and 
places. The symbols are converted into English words by translation software, 
formatted into caption data, and sent over telephone lines to be mixed with 
the video signal. The closed-captioned video signal is then sent to your home 
via satellite, airwaves, or cable. Your decoder changes the data into captions 
displayed on your screen. All this happens one to three seconds after a 
speaker's words are spoken. This allows no time to make any corrections. One 
wrong keystroke can produce a strange combination of letters or syllables. A 
poorly prepared dictionary can also produce errors. 

You can recognize stenocaptioning because there are pauses as the words and 
phrases paint onto the screen. Some news programs are captioned with a 
combination of stenocaptioning and "prescripted" captions. The prescripted 
captions paint on smoothly one row at a time. Since these captions were typed 
ahead of time, there should be no errors. When you see pauses within rows, you 
know that a stenocaptioner has taken over. Stenocaption errors usually result 
when the computer combines phonetic information to create a wrong (but 
similar-sounding) word or phrase; for example: "okay you pant" instead of 
"occupant." 

Most responsible captioning agencies require a 99% accuracy rate for real-time 
captioning, but at 250 words per minute, even the best and most experienced 
stenocaptioner can produce up to two errors every minute. Watch the network 
evening news for examples of experienced stenocaptioning. If you are watching 
garbled real-time captions and you are sure that poor reception is not 
creating the problem, the captioning agency may have put an inexperienced 
person on the air. 


* Electronic Newsroom Captioning

Some local newscasts are closed captioned using an electronic newsroom system. 
Such systems provide automatic captioning based on material typed ahead of 
time into the teleprompter. Late-breaking news, ad libs, and live segments 
(field reports 



[Page 92]
CAPTIONING -- Live Captioning - Electronic Newsroom Captioning (continued)

or weather forecasts) usually go uncaptioned. These systems occasionally put 
the wrong captions on a story or roll the captioning too fast. 

* Off-line Captioning

You should expect virtually error-free captioning when a program is taped and 
captions can be prepared "off-line." Captions should be thoroughly checked and 
reviewed before broadcast or duplication. It is the captioning agency's 
responsibility to review its work and ensure high-quality captioning. It is 
the responsibility of the producers and networks to monitor the work of their 
captioning agencies. 

Please note that a common symptom of poor reception (or technical problems at 
the TV station) is pairs of missing letters; for example "Good night" might 
appear as "Good nht". While this may look like a misspelling, it is probably 
not a problem of sloppy captioning. Rather, poor reception or a technical 
glitch at the TV station could be the problem. 

 

[Page 93]

9.  Braille *141

What Is Braille?

Braille is a series of raised dots that can be read with the fingers by people 
who are blind or whose eyesight is not sufficient for reading printed 
material. Teachers, parents, and others who are not visually impaired 
ordinarily read braille with their eyes. Braille is not a language. Rather, it 
is a code by which languages such as English or Spanish may be written and 
read. 


What Does Braille Look Like?

Braille symbols are formed within units of space known as braille cells. A 
full braille cell consists of six raised dots arranged in two parallel columns 
each having three dots. The dot positions are identified by numbers from one 
through six. Sixty-four combinations are possible using one or more of these 
six dots. A single cell can be used to represent an alphabet letter, number, 
punctuation mark, or even a whole word. 


How Was Braille Invented?

Louis Braille was born in Coupvray, France, on January 4, 1809. He attended 
the National Institute for Blind Youth in Paris, France, as a student. While 
attending the Institute, Braille yearned for more books to read. He 
experimented with ways to make an alphabet that was easy to read with the 
fingertips. The writing system he invented, at age fifteen, evolved from the 
tactile "Ecriture Nocturne" (night writing) code invented by Charles Barbier 
for sending military messages that could be read on the battlefield at night, 
without light. 


How Is Braille Written?

When every letter of every word is expressed in braille, it is referred to as 
Grade 1 braille. Very few books or other reading material are transcribed in 
Grade 1 braille. However, many newly blinded adults find this useful for 
labeling personal or kitchen items. 

The system used for reproducing most textbooks and publications is known as 
Grade 2 braille. In this system cells are used individually or in combination 
with others to form a 




[Page 94]
BRAILLE - How is braille written (continued)

variety of contractions or whole words. For example, in Grade 1 braille the 
phrase you like him requires twelve cell spaces. It would look like this: 

  you like him

If written in Grade 2 braille, this same phrase would take only six cell 
spaces to write. This is because the letters y and l are also used for the 
whole words you and like respectively. Likewise, the word him is formed by 
combining the letters h and m. It would look like this: 

  y l hm

There are 189 different letter contractions and 76 short-form words used in 
Grade 2 braille. These "short cuts" are used to reduce the volume of paper 
needed for reproducing books in braille and to make the reading process 
easier. 

Grade 1 (or uncontracted) braille has nothing to do with first grade. Most 
children learn grade 2 (contracted) braille from kindergarten on. In recent 
years, some teachers have chosen to begin teaching grade 1 braille first, 
transitioning to grade 2 braille by the mid-elementary years. There is 
currently no research that supports the superiority of one approach over the 
other. 

Just as printed matter can be produced with a paper and pencil, typewriter, or 
printer, braille can also be written in several ways. The braille equivalent 
of paper and pencil is the slate and stylus. This consists of a slate or 
template with evenly spaced depressions for the dots of braille cells, and a 
stylus for creating the individual braille dots. With paper placed in the 
slate, tactile dots are made by pushing the pointed end of the stylus into the 
paper over the depressions. The paper bulges on its reverse side forming 
"dots." Because of their portability, the slate and stylus are especially 
helpful for taking notes during lectures and for labeling such things as file 
folders. 

Braille is also produced by a machine known as a braillewriter. Unlike a 
typewriter which has more than fifty keys, the braillewriter has only six keys 
and a space bar. These keys are numbered to correspond with the six dots of a 
braille cell. In that most braille symbols contain more than a single dot, all 
or any of the braillewriter keys can be pushed at the same time. 


[Page 95]
BRAILLE - How is braille written (continued)

Technological developments in the computer industry have provided and continue 
to expand additional avenues of literacy for braille users. Software programs 
and portable electronic braille notetakers allow users to save and edit their 
writing, have it displayed back to them either verbally or tactually, and 
produce a hard copy via a desktop computer-driven braille embosser. 

Since its development in France by Louis Braille in the latter part of the 
nineteenth century, braille has become not only an effective means of 
communication, but also a proven avenue for achieving and enhancing literacy 
for people who are blind or have significant vision loss. *142 







[Page 96]
10.  Video Description *143, *144

Video Description uses spoken explanations and descriptions of visual elements 
that are inserted into a television or video program without interfering with 
the sounds and dialogue that are a regular part of the program. This service 
is available on a limited basis on certain cable television channels, on 
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) television shows, commercial broadcast 
stations, and on videotapes for purchase or rental. 

A research project completed by the American Foundation for the Blind in 1997 
(partially funded by the U.S. Department of Education, grant #H026G40001) 
studied issues related to video description, and to television and video 
watching by people who are blind or visually impaired. The following are 
highlights of that study: 

* Blind and visually impaired people (approximately 3% of the U.S. population) 
watch television and videotapes about as often as those who are not visually 
impaired. In addition, their households own televisions and VCRs, and 
subscribe to cable television, to the same extent as other households. 
However, many find the experience frustrating. 

* In order to increase their understanding and enjoyment of television shows, 
people who are blind or visually impaired take various actions including 
sitting closer to the television set, buying larger television sets, and 
asking other people questions about what is happening on the screen. 

* Most people who are blind or visually impaired find that their enjoyment of 
television is increased when sighted companions informally describe the visual 
aspects of programming to them. 

* The vast majority of those who have experienced formal video description say 
they would be more likely to watch a television show or video with description 
than without. 

* The vast majority of blind and visually impaired people who have experienced 
description say that it is important to their enjoyment of programming. 

* Most people who have watched video description with a sighted person say it 
rarely or never interferes with the sighted person's enjoyment of programming. 



[Page 97]
VIDEO DESCRIPTION (continued)

* People who have experienced video description feel that it affords important 
benefits, which fall into the categories of enhanced viewing, learning, and 
social experiences watching television and videotapes. 

* "Dramas or Mysteries" and "Nature or Science" are the two most popular 
categories of television shows that blind and visually impaired people would 
like to see described. For videotapes of movies, the most popular categories 
are "Serious Dramas" and "Documentaries." 



[Page 98]

11.  DISABILITY ACCESS SYMBOLS


Access to Low Vision *145

This symbol may be used to indicate access for people who are blind or have 
low vision, including: guided tours, paths to a nature trail, scent gardens in 
a park, tactile tours or museum exhibitions that may be touched. 


Accessibility Symbol *146

The wheelchair symbol should only be used to indicate access for individuals 
with limited mobility, including wheelchair users. For example, the symbol is 
used to indicate accessible entrances, bathrooms, or telephones that have been 
lowered for wheelchair users. Remember that a ramped entrance is not 
completely accessible if there are no curb cuts, and an elevator is not 
accessible if it can only be reached via steps. 
 

Accessible Print *147

The symbol for large print is 'Large Print' printed in 18 Point or larger 
text. In addition to indicating that large print versions of books, pamphlets, 
museum guides and theater programs are available, the symbol may be used on 
conference or membership forms to indicate that print materials may be 
provided in large print. Sans serif or modified serif print with good contrast 
is highly recommended, and special attention should be paid to letter and word 
spacing. 


Assistive Listening Systems *148

These systems transmit sound via hearing aids or headsets. They include 
infrared, loop and FM systems. Portable systems may be available from the same 
audiovisual equipment suppliers that service conferences and meetings. 



[Page 99]
DISABILITY ACCESS SYMBOLS (continued)


Audio Description (Video Description) *149, *150

There are 2 symbols that are used for this service that makes television, 
video, film, and live performances more accessible for persons who are blind 
or have low vision. For televisions and monitors, descriptions of visual 
elements are provided by a trained Audio Describer using the Secondary Audio 
Program (SAP).  


Braille Symbol *151

This symbol indicates that printed matter is available in braille, including 
exhibition labeling, publications, and signage. 


Closed Captioning *152 

These symbols indicate that a television program or videotape is closed 
captioned. The "CC" (with or without the rounded rectangle surrounding it) is 
generic and can be used by any company.  The second icon that looks like a 
comic strip speech "balloon" (a rounded rectangle with a small "tail" 
protruding below) is a registered service mark of the National Captioning 
Institute (NCI), and is only used for productions that are captioned by NCI. 



[Page 100]
DISABILITY ACCESS SYMBOLS (continued)

Sign Language Interpretation *153

The symbol indicates that sign language interpretation is provided for  
lectures, tours, performances, conferences, or other programs. 
 

TTY (Teletypewriter) *154

TTYs are also known as text telephones (TTs), or telecommunications devices 
for the deaf (TDDs).  The TTY symbol indicates that TTYs are available. 


Volume Control Telephone *155

This symbol indicates that telephone handsets with amplified sound and/or 
adjustable volume controls are available. 


Web Access *156

This symbol appears on web sites that have been designed with accessibility 
features.  The symbol should always be used with the following alt-text tag: 
Web Access Symbol (for people with disabilities). 





[Page 101]

This page is intentionally blank.



[Page 102]

APPENDIX



[Page 103]

APPENDIX A

Amendment of Part 1, Subpart N of the Commission's Rules Concerning Non-
Discrimination on the Basis of Disability in the Commission's Programs and 
Activities 



Before the
Federal Communications Commission
Washington, D.C. 20554




In the Matter of

Amendment of Part 1, Subpart N of the Commission's Rules Concerning Non-
Discrimination on the Basis of Disability in the Commission's Programs and 
Activities 

  
ORDER



Adopted:  March 4, 2003  
Released:  March 12, 2003


By the Commission:  Chairman Powell, Commissioners Copps and Adelstein issuing 
separate statements. 

1. As originally enacted, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
prohibited discrimination against individuals with disabilities under any 
"program or activity" receiving Federal financial assistance. *157  In 1978, 
Congress amended Section 504 to cover any program or activity conducted by any 
Executive Branch agency or the United States Postal Service.   The 1978 
amendment required covered agencies to promulgate regulations enforcing 
Section 504's prohibitions.  On April 15, 1987, the Commission released a 
Report and Order that adopted with minor modifications the Department of 
Justice's prototype regulations for implementing and enforcing Section 504. 
*158  The Report 


[Page 104]

and Order noted that the legislative history of the 1978 amendments indicated 
that Congress intended the amendments to apply to all federal agencies, 
including independent regulatory agencies such as this Commission. *159   
Except for adding consumer complaint procedures, the Commission has not 
updated its Section 504 regulations since 1987. 

2. By this Order, we amend Part 1, Subpart N of our rules, entitled 
"Enforcement of Non-discrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs or 
Activities Conducted by the Federal Communications Commission," 47 C.F.R. 
1.1801 et seq., to update the Commission's Section 504 regulations.  
Specifically, we amend Subpart N throughout to replace the terms "handicap," 
"individual with a handicap," and "individuals with handicaps" with the terms 
"disability," "individual with a disability," and "individuals with 
disabilities," respectively, in keeping with the most current statutory terms 
used in the Americans with Disabilities Act. *160  We amend sections 1.1803 
and 1.1810 to specify filing and signature formats for persons with 
disabilities who wish to file using alternative media.  We add a new section 
1.1805 to our rules to provide for the Federal Communications Commission 
Section 504 Programs and Activities Accessibility Handbook (Section 504 
Handbook).  The Section 504 Handbook is intended as a guide to implement the 
Commission's responsibilities under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. 
*161   This handbook describes the methods and procedures for accommodation 
available at the Commission to achieve a consistent and complete 
accommodations policy.    It is for internal staff use and public information 
only, and is not intended to create any rights, responsibilities, or 
independent causes of action against the Federal Government. 

3. In addition, we amend section 1.1803 to define the term "programs or 
activities" as that term is used in Subpart N.  We amend section 1.1810 to 
require that the self-evaluation process be held every three years, during 
which time we will seek public comment on the accessibility of our programs 
and activities as required by Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.  
Finally, we amend section 1.1849 to add a procedure for individuals who are 
requesting accessibility to the Commission's programs and facilities.  We note 
that requests for accommodation requiring the assistance of other persons 
(e.g., an American Sign Language interpreter) can best be provided if the 
request is made five business days before a Commission event. *162 

4. The modifications to Part 1, Subpart N undertaken by this Order are rules 
that pertain to agency organization, procedure and practice.  Consequently, 
the notice and comment provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act are 
inapplicable. *163   The procedural rule modifications will be effective 
immediately upon publication in the Federal Register. *164 




[Page 105]

5. Accordingly, IT IS ORDERED that, pursuant to Section 5 of the 
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. Sec. 155, Part 1, Subpart N 
of the Commission's rules IS AMENDED as set forth in the attached Appendix, 
effective upon publication in the Federal Register. 

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

Marlene H. Dortch
Secretary





[Page 106]

APPENDIX A 

FINAL RULE AMENDMENTS 

Part 1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:

1) The authority citation for Part 1 continues to read as follows:

AUTHORITY: 47 U.S.C. 151, 154(i), 154(j), 155, 225, 303(r), 309 and 325(e), 
and 29 USC 794.  

2) Part 1 Subpart N is amended to read as follows:

SUBPART N--ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY IN
PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION


Sec. 1.1801 Purpose.

 The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 119 of the Rehabilitation, 
Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, 
which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (section 504) to 
prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability in programs or activities 
conducted by Executive agencies or the United States Postal Service. 


Sec. 1.1802 Applications.

 This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the Federal 
Communications Commission. The programs or activities of entities that are 
licensed or certified by the Federal Communications Commission are not covered 
by these regulations. 
     

Sec. 1.1803 Definitions.

 For purposes of this part, the term--

 "Auxiliary aids" means services or devices that enable persons with impaired 
sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal opportunity to 
participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or activities conducted by 
the Commission. For example, auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired 
vision include readers, Brailled materials, audio recordings, and other 
similar services and devices. Auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired 
hearing include telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with 
hearing aids, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TTY/TDDs), 
interpreters, Computer-aided realtime transcription (CART), captioning, 
notetakers, written materials, and other similar services and devices. 

 "Commission" means Federal Communications Commission. 



[Page 107]

 "Complete complaint" means a written statement, or a complaint in audio, 
Braille, electronic, and/or video format, that contains the complainant's name 
and address and describes the Commission's alleged discriminatory action in 
sufficient detail to inform the Commission of the nature and date of the 
alleged violation of section 504. It shall be signed by the complainant or by 
someone authorized to do so on his or her behalf. The signature of the 
complainant, or signature of someone authorized by the complainant to do so on 
his or her behalf, shall be provided on print complaints. Complaints in audio, 
Braille, electronic, and/or video formats shall contain an affirmative 
identity statement of the individual, which for this purpose shall be 
considered to be functionally equivalent to a complainant's signature. 
Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall describe or 
identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of discrimination. 

 "Facility" means all or any portion of buildings, structures, equipment, 
roads, walks, parking lots, or other real or personal property. 

 "General Counsel" means the General Counsel of the Federal Communications 
Commission. 

 "Individual with a disability" means any individual who has a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, 
has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an 
impairment. As used in this definition, the phrase: 
 
  (1) "Physical or mental impairment" includes, but is not limited to, --
 
    (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or 
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including 
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic 
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; 
 
    (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, 
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning 
disabilities; 

    (iii) Diseases and conditions such as orthopedic, visual, speech, and 
hearing impairments; cerebral palsy; epilepsy; muscular dystrophy; multiple 
sclerosis; cancer; heart disease; diabetes; mental retardation; emotional 
illness; and drug addiction and alcoholism. 

  (2) "Major life activities" include functions such as caring for one's self, 
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, 
learning, and working. 
  
  (3) "Has a record of such an impairment" means has a history of, or has been 
misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially 
limits one or more major life activities. 

  (4) "Is regarded as having an impairment" means--

    (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit 
major life activities but is treated by the Commission as constituting such a 
limitation; 

    (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major 
life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such 
impairment; or 



[Page 108]

    (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (1) of this 
definition but is treated by the Commission as having such impairment. 

 "Managing Director" means the individual delegated authority as described in 
47 C.F.R. Sec. 0.11. 

 "Programs or Activities" mean any activity of the Commission permitted or 
required by its enabling statutes, including but not limited to any licensing 
or certification program, proceeding, investigation, hearing, meeting, board 
or committee. 

 "Qualified individual with a disability" means--

  (1) With respect to any Commission program or activity under which an 
individual is required to perform services or to achieve a level of 
accomplishment, an individual with a disability who, with or without 
reasonable modification to rules, policies, or practices or the provision of 
auxiliary aids, meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation 
in the program or activity and can achieve the purpose of the program or 
activity; or 

  (2) With respect to any other program or activity, an individual with a 
disability who, with or without reasonable modification to rules, policies, or 
practices or the provision of auxiliary aids, meets the essential eligibility 
requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that program 
or activity; or 

  (3) The definition of that term as defined for purposes of employment in 29 
C.F.R. Sec. 1630.2(m), which is made applicable to this part by Sec. 1.1840. 

 "Section 504" means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Pub.L. 93-
112, 87 Stat. 394, 29 U.S.C. 794, as amended by the Rehabilitation Act 
Amendments of 1974, Pub.L. 93-516, 88 Stat. 1617, and the Rehabilitation, 
Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, 
Pub.L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955, and the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986, 
sec. 103(d), Pub.L. 99-506, 100 Stat. 1810. As used in this part, section 504 
applies only to programs or activities conducted by Executive agencies and not 
to federally assisted programs. 

 "Section 504 Officer" is the Commission employee charged with overseeing the 
Commission's section 504 programs and activities. 


Sec. 1.1805  Federal Communications Commission Section 504 Programs and 
Activities Accessibility Handbook. 

The Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau shall publish a "Federal 
Communications Commission Section 504 Programs and Activities Accessibility 
Handbook" ("Section 504 Handbook") for Commission staff, and shall update the 
Section 504 Handbook as necessary and at least every three years. The Section 
504 Handbook shall be available to the public in hard copy upon request and 
electronically on the Commission's Internet website. The Section 504 Handbook 
shall contain procedures for releasing documents, holding meetings, receiving 
comments, and for other aspects of Commission programs and activities to 
achieve accessibility.  These procedures will ensure that the Commission 
presents a consistent and complete accommodation policy pursuant to 29 U.S.C. 
Sec. 794, as amended. The Section 504 Handbook is for internal staff use and 
public information only, and is not intended to create any rights, 
responsibilities, or independent cause of action against the Federal 
Government. 



[Page 109]

Sec. 1.1810  Review of compliance.

 (a) The Commission shall, beginning in 2004 and at least every three years 
thereafter, review its current policies and practices in view of advances in 
relevant technology and achievability. Based on this review, the Commission 
shall modify its practices and procedures to ensure that the Commission's 
programs and activities are fully accessible. 

 (b) The Commission shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, 
including individuals with disabilities or organizations representing 
individuals with disabilities, to participate in the review process by 
submitting comments. Written comments shall be signed by the commenter or by 
someone authorized to do so on his or her behalf. The signature of the 
commenter, or signature of someone authorized by the commenter to do so on his 
or her behalf, shall be provided on print comments. Comments in audio, 
Braille, electronic, and/or video formats shall contain an affirmative 
identity statement of the individual, which for this purpose shall be 
considered to be functionally equivalent to a commenter's signature. 

 (c) The Commission shall maintain on file and make available for public 
inspection for four years following completion of the compliance review --

   (1) A description of areas examined and problems identified; 

   (2) All comments and complaints filed regarding the Commission's 
compliance; and 

   (3) A description of any modifications made. 
  

Sec. 1.1811 Notice.

 The Commission shall make available to employees, applicants, participants, 
beneficiaries, and other interested persons information regarding the 
regulations set forth in this part, and their applicability to the programs or 
activities conducted by the Commission.  The Commission shall make such 
information available to such persons in such manner as the Section 504 
Officer finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against 
discrimination assured them by section 504. 


Sec. 1.1830  General prohibitions against discrimination. 

 (a) No qualified individual with a disability shall, on the basis of 
disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or 
otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity 
conducted by the Commission. 

 (b) Discriminatory actions prohibited. 

    (1) The Commission, in providing any aid, benefit, or service, may not, 
directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, on the 
basis of disability--

      (i) Deny a qualified individual with a disability the opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service; 

      (ii) Afford a qualified individual with a disability an opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not equal 
to that afforded others;



[Page 110]

      (iii) Provide a qualified individual with a disability with an aid, 
benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording equal opportunity to 
obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level 
of achievement as that provided to others; 

      (iv) Provide different or separate aid, benefits, or services to 
individuals with disabilities or to any class of individuals with disabilities 
than is provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide 
qualified individuals with disabilities with aid, benefits, or services that 
are as effective as those provided to others; 

      (v) Deny a qualified individual with a disability the opportunity to 
participate as a member of planning or advisory boards; or 

      (vi) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with a disability in the 
enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others 
receiving the aid, benefit, or service. 

    (2) The Commission may not deny a qualified individual with a disability 
the opportunity to participate in any program or activity even where the 
Commission is also providing equivalent permissibly separate or different 
programs or activities for persons with disabilities. 

    (3) The Commission may not, directly or through contractual or other 
arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration--

      (i) That have the purpose or effect of subjecting qualified individuals 
with disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability; or 

      (ii) That have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially 
impairing accomplishment of the objectives of a program or activity with 
respect to individuals with disabilities. 

    (4) The Commission may not, in determining the site or location of a 
facility, make selections--

      (i) That have the purpose or effect of excluding individuals with 
disabilities from, denying them the benefits of, or otherwise subjecting them 
to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the Commission; 
or 

      (ii) That have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially 
impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of a program or activity with 
respect to individuals with disabilities. 

    (5) The Commission, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not 
use criteria that subject qualified individuals with disabilities to 
discrimination on the basis of disability. 

    (6) The Commission may not administer a licensing or certification program 
in a manner that subjects qualified individuals with disabilities to 
discrimination on the basis of disability, nor may the Commission establish 
requirements for the programs or activities of licensees or certified entities 
that subject qualified individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the 
basis of disability. However, the programs or activities of entities that are 
licensed or certified by the Commission are not, themselves, covered by this 
part. 




[Page 111]

    (7) The Commission shall make reasonable modifications in policies, 
practices, or procedures when the modifications are necessary to avoid 
discrimination on the basis of disability, unless the Commission can 
demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature 
of the program, service, or activity. 

 (c) This part does not prohibit the exclusion of persons without disabilities 
from the benefits of a program limited by Federal statute or Executive order 
to individuals with disabilities, or the exclusion of a specific class of 
individuals with disabilities from a program limited by Federal statute or 
Executive order to a different class of individuals with disabilities. 

 (d) The Commission shall administer programs and activities in the most 
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with 
disabilities. 


Sec. 1.1840  Employment.

 No qualified individual with a disability shall, on the basis of disability, 
be subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity 
conducted by the Commission. The definitions, requirements and procedures of 
section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. Sec. 791, as 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 C.F.R. Parts 
1614 and 1630, as well as the procedures set forth in the Basic Negotiations 
Agreement Between the Federal Communications Commission and National Treasury 
Employees Union, as amended, and Subchapter III of the Civil Service Reform 
Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. Sec. 7121(d), shall apply to employment in federally 
conducted programs or activities. 


Sec. 1.1849  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.

 (a) Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 1.1850, no qualified individual with 
a disability shall, because the Commission's facilities are inaccessible to, 
or unusable, by individuals with disabilities, be denied the benefits of, be 
excluded from participation in, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination 
under any program or activity conducted by the Commission. 

 (b) Individuals shall request accessibility to the Commission's programs and 
facilities by contacting the Commission's Section 504 Officer. Such contact 
may be made in the manner indicated in the FCC Section 504 Handbook. The 
Commission will make every effort to provide accommodations requiring the 
assistance of other persons (e.g., American Sign Language interpreters, 
communication access realtime translation (CART) providers, transcribers, 
captioners, and readers) if the request is made to the Commission's Section 
504 Officer a minimum of five business days in advance of the program. If such 
requests are made fewer than five business days prior to an event, the 
Commission will make every effort to secure accommodation services, although 
it may be less likely that the Commission will be able to secure such 
services. 


Sec. 1.1850  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.

 (a) General. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the Commission 
shall operate each program or activity so that the program or activity, when 
viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals 
with disabilities. This paragraph does not-

    (1) Necessarily require the Commission to make each of its existing 
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; 




[Page 112]

    (2) Require the Commission to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or 
activity, or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those 
circumstances where Commission personnel believe that the proposed action 
would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in undue 
financial and administrative burdens, the Commission has the burden of proving 
that compliance with Sec. 1.1850(a) would result in such alteration or 
burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or 
burdens must be made by the Managing Director, in consultation with the 
Section 504 Officer, after considering all Commission resources available for 
use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and 
must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that 
conclusion. If an action would result in such an alteration or such burdens, 
the Commission shall take any other action that would not result in such an 
alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with 
disabilities receive the benefits and services of the program or activity. 

 (b) Methods. The Commission may comply with the requirements of this section 
through such means as the redesign of equipment, reassignment of services to 
accessible buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, 
delivery of services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing 
facilities and construction of new facilities, or any other methods that 
result in making its programs or activities readily accessible to and usable 
by individuals with disabilities. The Commission is not required to make 
structural changes in existing facilities where other methods are effective in 
achieving compliance with this section. The Commission, in making alterations 
to existing buildings, shall meet accessibility requirements to the extent 
compelled by the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 
Sec. 4151-4157), and any regulations implementing it. In choosing among 
available methods for meeting the requirements of this section, the Commission 
shall give priority to those methods that offer programs and activities to 
qualified individuals with disabilities in the most integrated setting 
appropriate. 

 (c) Time period for compliance. The Commission shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section within sixty (60) days of the 
effective date of this subpart, except that where structural changes in 
facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within three (3) years 
of the effective date of this part. 

 (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to facilities will 
be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, the Commission shall develop, 
within six (6) months of the effective date of this subpart, a transition plan 
setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The Commission 
shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, including individuals with 
disabilities or organizations representing individuals with disabilities, to 
participate in the development of the transition plan by submitting comments 
(both oral and written). A copy of the transitional plan shall be made 
available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum--

    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the Commission's facilities that limit 
the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals with 
disabilities; 

    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible; 

    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition plan is 
longer than one (1) year, identify steps that will be taken during each year 
of the transition period; 

    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan. 



[Page 113]

Sec. 1.1851 Building accessibility: New construction and alterations. 

 Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered by, on 
behalf of, or for the use of the Commission shall be designed, constructed, or 
altered so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with 
disabilities. The definitions, requirements and standards of the Architectural 
Barriers Act, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4151-4157, as established in 41 C.F.R. Sec. 101-
19.600 to 101-19.607, apply to buildings covered by this section. 


Sec. 1.1870 Compliance procedures. 

 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this section applies 
to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of disability in programs or 
activities conducted by the Commission. 

 (b) The Commission shall process complaints alleging violations of section 
504 with respect to employment according to the procedures established by the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 pursuant to 
section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 791. 

 (c) Complaints alleging violation of section 504 with respect to the 
Commission's programs and activities shall be addressed to the Managing 
Director and filed with the Office of the Secretary, Federal Communications 
Commission, 445 12th Street, SW., Room TWB- 204, Washington, DC 20554. 
 
 (d) Acceptance of complaint. 

    (1) The Commission shall accept and investigate all complete complaints, 
as defined in section 1.1803 of this part, for which it has jurisdiction. All 
such complaints must be filed within one- hundred eighty (180) days of the 
alleged act of discrimination. The Commission may extend this time period for 
good cause. 

    (2) If the Commission receives a complaint that is not complete as defined 
in section 1.1803 of this part, the complainant will be notified within thirty 
(30) days of receipt of the incomplete complaint that additional information 
is needed. If the complainant fails to complete the complaint within thirty 
(30) days of receipt of this notice, the Commission shall dismiss the 
complaint without prejudice. 

 (e) If the Commission receives a complaint over which it does not have 
jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make 
reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate government 
entity. 

 (f) The Commission shall notify the Architectural and Transportation Barriers 
Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a building or 
facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4151-4157, is not readily accessible to and usable by 
individuals with disabilities. 

 (g) Within one-hundred eighty (180) days of the receipt of a complete 
complaint, as defined in section 1.1803 of this part, for which it has 
jurisdiction, the Commission shall notify the complainant of the results of 
the investigation in a letter containing--

    (1) Findings of fact and conclusions of law; 



[Page 114]

    (2) A description of a remedy for each violation found; and 

    (3) A notice of the right to appeal. 

 (h) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or remedies must 
be filed by the complainant within ninety (90) days of receipt from the 
Commission of the letter required by Sec. 1.1870(g). The Commission may extend 
this time for good cause. 

 (i) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by the Office of the 
Secretary, Federal Communications Commission, 445 12th Street, SW., Room TWB- 
204, Washington, DC 20554. 

 (j) The Commission shall notify the complainant of the results of the appeal 
within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the appeal request. If the Commission 
determines that it needs additional information from the complainant, and 
requests such information, the Commission shall have sixty (60) days from the 
date it receives the additional information to make its determination on the 
appeal. 

 (k) The time limits cited in (g) and (j) of this section may be extended with 
the permission of the General Counsel. 

 (l) The Commission may delegate its authority for conducting complaint 
investigations to other federal agencies, except that the authority for making 
the final determination may not be delegated to another agency. 




[Page 115]

APPENDIX B

Federal Communications Commission Section 504 Programs and Activities 
Accessibility Handbook. 




[Page 116]

SEPARATE STATEMENT OF 
CHAIRMAN MICHAEL K. POWELL

Re: Amendment of Part 1, Subpart N of the Commission's Rules Concerning Non-
Discrimination on the Basis of Disability in the Commission's Programs and 
Activities.  

Technology has the power to deliver to Americans with 
disabilities access that previously was unimaginable. Making access solutions 
available to the disability community has been a core objective of this 
Commission--from closed captioning to IP relay. Today's Order ensures that a 
high level of access extends to the Commission as well, so that all Americans 
have the opportunity to meaningfully participate in the Commission's work. 

Since the Commission first promulgated disability accommodation rules in 1987, 
there have been many changes in disability law, and the "state of the art" in 
access technology has advanced considerably. Today's Order brings the 
Commission's rules up-to-date with these changes. In addition, adoption of the 
Accessibility Handbook will ensure that the Commission's policies are 
consistently applied and that all Commission staff are adequately prepared to 
deal with accommodation requests. The Order further provides that every three 
years the Commission will review its accommodation policies, so that we may 
learn and grow from our experiences, and keep pace with ever-changing 
technology. Only through constant vigilance can we ensure that individuals 
with disabilities are obtaining the best possible accommodations and the 
highest level of access. 

The creation of this Accessibility Handbook was a significant undertaking. I 
applaud the leadership demonstrated by the Consumer & Governmental Affairs 
Bureau and its Disability Rights Office in making this remarkable and 
practical resource a reality--and a model for other federal agencies and the 
private sector. Such efforts further secure the FCC's place as one of the most 
accessible institutions in government--an achievement for which I am 
tremendously proud. 




[Page 117]

SEPARATE STATEMENT OF 
COMMISSIONER MICHAEL J. COPPS

Re: In the Matter of Amendment of Part 1, Subpart N of the Commission's Rules 
Concerning Non-Discrimination on the Basis of Disability in the Commission's 
Programs and Activities 

I am pleased to support the Section 504 Order and Handbook. This update is 
long overdue, but all the more welcome for that. I am encouraged that we are 
updating our regulations today and establishing a regular review of these 
rules to help keep them up-to-date in the future.  

The Commission has made great strides over the past several years to improve 
accessibility. Among other things, the Commission wrote new rules to ensure 
that communications products and services are accessible to those with 
disabilities; overhauled and updated our Telecommunications Relay Services 
(TRS) rules; established and implemented 711 as a nationwide relay number; 
took action on captioning to ensure that everyone has access to televised 
information, including most importantly warnings about emergency situations; 
and allocated spectrum for assistive listening devices. 

But we must not rest on these accomplishments; we must build on them. The 
Commission needs now to look at the important issues of Internet relay, 
hearing aid compatibility for digital wireless phones, accessibility to 
digital and interactive television, and implementation of TTY access to E-911 
and video description.   

My office was fortunate to have an intern with a disability to work with us 
last summer. The Commission did an outstanding job of providing accommodations 
for us, but I wonder whether everyone at this agency is aware of the kinds of 
accommodations the Commission can--and indeed, is required to--provide for 
our employees with disabilities. This Handbook is a good step to help us 
understand, and to make us a model not only of compliance--but of 
leadership. We can do more. I would like to see this Handbook be used as a 
model for the Commission to develop other handbooks to address related issues. 
The Commission has responsibilities under Sections 501 and 508 of the 
Rehabilitation Act to provide accommodations to our employees with 
disabilities, and to ensure that the electronic and information technology 
that we use, build, buy, and/or lease is accessible to persons with 
disabilities. A Section 501 Handbook could be a valuable tool for FCC 
employees, co-workers, and supervisors of employees with disabilities. 
Likewise, a Section 508 Handbook would assist all of us at the Commission who 
work with electronic and information technology to learn how to make decisions 
when procuring technology. It is not only the right thing to do, it is the 
law. 

I want to thank the Disability Rights Office for its leadership on this item, 
particularly those who spearheaded the Handbook. Thank you for your dedication 
to your jobs, and for helping the Commission to be accessible to members of 
the public with disabilities. 




[Page 118]

SEPARATE STATEMENT OF 
COMMISSIONER JONATHAN S. ADELSTEIN


Re: In the Matter of Amendment of Part 1, Subpart N of the Commission's Rules 
Concerning Non-Discrimination on the Basis of Disability in the Commission's 
Programs and Activities 

I would like to commend the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau for its 
successful efforts in bringing yet another item to the Commission floor. After 
reading the handbook, I must say that it is both very thorough and 
informative. 

While a staff member in the United States Senate, I worked to help pass the 
Americans with Disabilities Act and devoted a great amount of attention to the 
Social Security Disability Insurance program. These types of issues ring very 
true to me. 

We, as a Commission, need to ensure that we have a uniform and comprehensive 
approach to ensuring accessibility to all Commission events in order to meet 
the Rehabilitation Act Section 504 requirements. As a federal entity, this is 
our mandate. I agree that in order to maintain that uniform approach, we need 
to periodically review the Commission's current policies and practices every 
three years in order to take into account any relevant technological advances. 
Again, I want to thank you for your time on this very important issue. 




[Page 119]

APPENDIX B

Braille Sample Page

The segment below is a translation of the braille embossed on the following 
page. 

      ,,AB ,,! ,,FCC

  ,! ,F$]AL ,-MUNIC,NS ,-MIS-
.N 7,,FCC7 IS AN 9DEP5D5T
,UNIT$ ,/ATES GOV]N;T AG5CY1
DIRECTLY RESPONSI# 6,3GRESS4
,! ,,FCC WAS E/ABLI%$ 0! 
,-MUNIC,NS ,ACT ( #AICD & IS
*>G$ ) REGULAT+ 9T]/ATE &
9T]N,NAL -MUNIC,NS 0RADIO1
TELEVI.N1 WIRE1 SATELLITE &
CA#4 ,! ,,FCC'S JURISDIC;N
COV]S ! #EJ /ATES1 ! ,4TRICT
( ,COLUMBIA1 & ,U4,S4 POSSES-
.NS4



[Page 120]

Page of embossed braille included in paper copies.



[Page 121]

INDEX



[Page 122]

INDEX

Please refer to the Table of Contents for a detailed outline of the topics 
covered in this Handbook. 



Access guidelines
  FCC Audio-visual media  40
  Meetings
    Attendee requests for accommodation  3
    FCC staff only  21-24
      Open to all staff  21-22
        In the Commission Meeting Room  21
        Not in the Commission Meeting Room  22
      Open to limited audience  23
      Pre-registration required  24
    Hosting accessible meetings and events  33-35
    Media used during presentations  36-39
      FCC events  36-37
      When speaking at non-FCC events  38-39
    Moderators  33-35
    Planner's responsibilities  3
    Sample wording for announcing interpreter availability  28
    With non-FCC attendees  25-31
      Commission Open Meetings  25
      On issues of interest to people with disabilities  28
      Open to limited public audience  27
      Pre-registration required  30
      Public meetings  26
  Releasing documents  32
  Training  41

Accessible format model statements  See Reasonable accommodations:Model 
statements:Accessible formats 

ADA  See Laws:Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 

Advisory committee access  See Access guidelines:Meetings 

ALDs  See Assistive listening devices 

Americans with Disabilities Act  See Laws:Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) 

Artificial larynx, definition  10 

Assistive listening devices  86 
  FM systems  86 
  Inductive or audio loop systems  87 
  Infrared systems  86 

Audio description  See Video description 

Audio loops  See Assistive listening devices 

Augmentative & alternative communication, definition  10 

AV access  See Access guidelines:FCC Audio-visual media 

Braille  93-95 

Captioning  89-92 

Captioning rule  71 

CART  88 

Closed captioning  See Captioning 

Communication Access Realtime Translation  See CART 

Communication boards, definition  10 

Computer Assisted Realtime  See CART 

Conference Access  See Access guidelines:Meetings 

Cued speech transliterators  9 

Disability access symbols  98-100 

Disability etiquette 
  Blind and visually impaired  76, 78-79 
  Deaf and hard of hearing  76, 82 
  General  3, 76 
  Offering help  76 
  Shaking hands  76 
  Sign language interpreters  76 
  Speech disabilities  76, 80 
  Wheelchairs  76 

Disability Rights Movement  5 

Disability terminology  74 

Documents 
  Releasing documents, access guidelines  See Access guidelines:Releasing 
documents 
  Submitted in alternate format  53-62 
    FCC points of contact  52 

E-mail address for Section 504  47 

Etiquette  See Disability etiquette 

Event Access  See Access guidelines:Meetings 

FCC 
  Basic principles of access  3 
  Commitment to access  2 
  Disability and access information  8 
  General access considerations 
    Contracting and acquisitions  18 
    Information access  13 
    Physical access  12 
    Safety  16 
    Staff activities  15 
  Points of contact  8 
  Types of access requested 
    For people who are blind or have low vision  8 
    For people who are deaf or hard of hearing  9 
    For people with mobility impairments  8 
    For people with other disabilities  11 
    For people with speech disabilities  10 

FCC University  41 

fcc504@fcc.gov  47 

Forum access  See Access guidelines:Meetings

Graphics, Disability access symbols  98-100 

HCO (Hearing carry over)  50 

Hearing Aid Compatibility Act  71 

Inclusive language  74 

Interpreters 
  Cued speech transliterators  9 
  Oral interpreters  9 
  Re-voicers, definition  10 
  Sign language interpreters  82-85 
    Code of ethics  84 
    Working with  76, 82 
  Tactile interpreters  9 

IP Relay  50 

Laws  4, 64-71 
  Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)  67-70 
    Title I, Employment  67 
    Title II, Public transportation  68 
    Title II, State and local government activities  67 
    Title III, Public accommodations  69 
    Title IV, Telecommunications relay services  69 
  Architectural Barriers Act  70 
  Rehabilitation Act  66 
    Section 501  66 
    Section 503  66 
    Section 504  4, 64 
      FCC Order  65 
    Section 508  66 
  Telecommunications Act  70 

Lipreading  2 

Logos, Disability access  98-100 

Loops  See Assistive listening devices 

Meeting Access  See Access guidelines:Meetings 

Notetakers, definition  9 

Open captioning  See Captioning 

Oral interpreters  9 

Politically correct language  74 

Reasonable accommodations 
  Model statements 
    Accessible formats  32 
      Presenters announcing availability upon request  39 
    Meetings 
      Commission Open Meetings  25 
      FCC staff only, in the Commission Meeting Room  21 
      FCC staff only, not in the Commission Meeting Room  22 
      FCC staff only, open to limited audience  23 
      On issues of interest to people with disabilities  29 
      Open to limited public audience  27 
      Public meetings  26 
      Registration forms  30 
      Sign language interpreters available  28 
    Registration forms  24 
  Requests  45 

Rehabilitation Act  See Laws:Rehabilitation Act 

Relay  See TRS 

Releasing documents  See Access guidelines:Releasing documents 

Requests for reasonable accommodations  See Reasonable accommodations:Requests  

Section 501  See Laws:Rehabilitation Act:Section 501 

Section 503  See Laws:Rehabilitation Act:Section 503 

Section 504  See Laws:Rehabilitation Act:Section 504 

Section 508  See Laws:Rehabilitation Act:Section 508 

Sign language interpreters 
  Code of ethics  84 
  Working with  76, 82 

Signers  See Sign language interpreters 

Spanish Relay Service  51 

Speech output device, definition  10 

Speechreading  2 

Statistics, Disability  73 

STS (Speech to speech)  50 

Symbols, Disability access  98-100 

Tactile interpreters  9 

Taskforce access  See Access Guidelines:Meetings 

Telecommunications Act 
  Section 713  71 
  Sections 255 & 251  70 

Telecommunications Relay Service  See TRS 

Television Decoder Circuitry Act  71 

Training access  See Access guidelines:Training 

Transcription procedures 
  Audio recordings  53-55 
  Braille  56-58 
  Sign language video recordings  59-62 

TRS  49-50 
  HCO (Hearing carry over)  50 
  IP Relay  50 
  Spanish Relay  51 
  STS (Speech to speech)  50 
  TTY calls  49 
  VCO (Voice carry over)  49 
  VRS (Video Relay Service)  50 

TRS legislation  69 

TTYs 
  Assistance with  48 
  Distribution in the FCC  48 
  Listing phone numbers  48 
  Office standards  48 
  Use with TRS (Relay)  49 

VCO (Voice Carry Over)  49 

Video description  96 

Video description rule  71 

VRS (Video Relay Service)  50 

Workshop access  See Access guidelines:Meetings 





FOOTNOTES: 

1 While many people still use the word "lipreading," experts consider it to be 
inaccurate. Speechreading is the more appropriate term for the process of 
understanding speech through visual perception of spoken language. For more 
information on speechreading see the Gallaudet University Rehabilitation 
Engineering Research Center (RERC) on Hearing Enhancement at 
http://www.hearingresearch.org/Dr.Ross/speechreading.htm (visited 12/3/02). 

2 Rehabilitation Act as amended, section 501, 29 U.S.C. Sec. 791; section 503, 
29 U.S.C. Sec. 793; section 504, 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794; section 508, 29 U.S.C. 
Sec. 794d. Enforcement of Non-discrimination on the Basis of Handicap in 
Programs or Activities Conducted by the Federal Communications Commission, 42 
U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq. 

3 The FCC Order implementing Section 504 can be found in the Appendix of this 
document. It includes definitions of terms and rules governing access to the 
Commission's programs and activities. 

4 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794. 

5 42 U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq. 

6 U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 11/1/02). 

7 For more information see "Disability Rights Laws" beginning on page 64 of 
this Handbook. 

8 Excerpted with compiler edits from Smithsonian Institution, National Museum 
of American History, Virtual Exhibitions, "The Disability Rights Movement," 
http://americanhistory.si.edu/disabilityrights/ (visited 11/1/02). 

9 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1803. 

10 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

11 For more information see page 13 of this Handbook. 

12 The Commission's Accessible Format Specialist can provide documents in 
ASCII or MSWord format. 

13 For more information see page 98 of this Handbook. 

14 The Commission's Accessible Format Specialist can provide documents in 
RealAudio or MP3 format. 

15 For more information see pages 71 & 96 of this Handbook. 

16 For more information see page 86 of this Handbook. 

17 For more information see page 89 of this Handbook. 

18 For more information see page 88 of this Handbook. 

19 For more information see page 82 of this Handbook. 

20 The microphones used with the portable systems transmit only to the 
assistive listening devices; they will not provide amplification to the room. 
For more information on assistive listening devices, see page 86. 

21 Some people who are deaf or hard of hearing do not use sign language. They 
understand speech by watching a person's face, body language, and lips. Oral 
interpreters are skilled in techniques of mouthing words clearly and 
effectively. For more information on oral interpreting, see the Registry of 
Interpreters for the Deaf at http://www.rid.org/128.pdf (visited 11/27/02). 

22 Cued Speech is a phonetically based visual communication system; it is not, 
however, a form of sign language. In English, Cued Speech transliterators 
employ 8 handshapes in 4 different locations near the mouth to represent 
sounds used in spoken language. It is generally used as an adjunct to 
speechreading. For more information, see the National Cued Speech Association 
at http://www.cuedspeech.org/ (visited 12/2/02). 

23 People who are deaf-blind generally receive information tactilely, i.e., 
through touch. Tactile interpreters convey information using various methods, 
but always in a way that relies on touch. Methods employed by tactile 
interpreters include using sign language (with the person who is deaf-blind 
resting one or both hands on the interpreters hands or wrists), using fingers 
to trace the letters of words in the palm of the person who is deaf-blind, and 
using the manual alphabet to spell words into the hand of the person who is 
deaf-blind. For more information on deaf-blindness, see the National 
Information Clearinghouse on Children Who are Deaf-Blind at 
http://www.tr.wou.edu/dblink/biblio.htm (visited 12/2/02). 

24 Notetakers are people who take notes for individuals who are deaf or hard 
of hearing. Notetakers may be needed because people with significant hearing 
loss must look at speakers or interpreters to understand what is being said. 
As a result, each time they look down to record a comment, they miss 
information being presented. 

25 A re-voicer is a person who listens to what an individual with a speech 
disability says, and then repeats it in clear speech. 

26 A communication board can be either manual or electronic. It displays 
letters, pictures, and/or words. Individuals communicate by pointing to the 
images or words. 

27 An artificial larynx is a device designed to allow an individual without a 
larynx to speak intelligibly. While artificial larynx design may vary, the 
purpose remains the same--to produce the vibrations necessary for speech. 

28 Speech output devices produce computer generated speech and vary in 
appearance and design. They are essentially computers with speakers that 
include a means, such as a keyboard or touch screen/pad, for selecting the 
words or phrases the user would like the computer to vocalize. These devices 
are frequently grouped under the term, augmentative and alternative 
communication (AAC). For more information on AAC, see the AAC Institute's 
research paper at 
http://www.aacinstitute.org/Resources/MethodsandTools/2002rateindex/paper.html 
(visited 12/3/02). 

29 The Access Board, Accessibility Guidelines and Standards, Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standard (UFAS), http://www.access-board.gov/ufas/ufas-
html/ufas.htm (visited 11/1/02). 

30 Id., Section 1 "Purpose." 

31 For additional guidelines, see, NASA Glenn Research Center: Usability 
Research Team, Design Guidelines, "Text, Fonts and Readability," 
http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/usability/textfontcss.html (visited 11/19/02). 

32 UCSB Linguistics, People, Linguistics faculty, Susanna Cumming: Guides, 
"Word for Linguists," "Typography," "Basic Typographical Principles," 
http://www.linguistics.ucsb.edu/faculty/cumming/WordForLinguists/Typography.htm 
(visited 11/19/02). 

33 NASA Glenn Research Center: Usability Research Team, Design Guidelines, 
"Text, Fonts and Readability," 
http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/usability/textfontcss.html (visited 11/19/02). 

34 Lighthouse International, Vision Resources, Low Vision, "Making Text 
Visible: Designing for People with Partial Sight." 
http://www.lighthouse.org/print_leg.htm (visited 11/18/02). 

35 Seeing, Hearing and Smelling the World: A Report from the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, "Breaking the Code of Color: Color Blindness: More 
Prevalent Among Males," http://www.hhmi.org/senses/b130.html (visited 
11/1/02). 

36 Lighthouse International, Vision Resources, Low Vision, "Effective Color 
Contrast: Designing for People with Partial Sight and Color Deficiencies," 
(visited 11/18/02). 

37 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

38 Id. 

39 Federally recognized employee organizations include groups such as BIG 
(Blacks in Government) and FAPAC (Federal Asian Pacific American Council). 

40 Access for federal employees with disabilities is addressed in Section 501 
of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. Sec. 791, and implementing regulation, 29 
C.F.R. Sec. 1614.203. The Commission's Office of Workplace Diversity has 
responsibility for Section 501 issues. 

41 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1830(b)(3)-(6). 

42 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

43 If services have already been arranged for a meeting that must be 
rescheduled, please notify the Audio Visual Center staff as soon as possible. 
The Commission is obligated to pay in full for services canceled without 
appropriate advanced notice. 

44 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

45 With advance notice to the Audio Visual Center, FCC staff can request that 
captioned text of an event be saved in MSWord format for use as reference 
material. Such text files are generally distributed by the Audio Visual Center 
staff within 2 business days of the event and are intended for internal use. 

46 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

47 Id. 

48 Id. 

49 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

50 If services have already been arranged for a meeting that must be 
rescheduled, please notify the Audio Visual Center staff as soon as possible. 
The Commission is obligated to pay in full for services canceled with less 
than 48 hours notice. 

51 For specific Security contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, 
see page 46 of this Handbook. 

52 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

53 For specific Security contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, 
see page 46 of this Handbook. 

54 If services have already been arranged for a meeting that must be 
rescheduled, please notify the Audio Visual Center staff as soon as possible. 
The Commission is obligated to pay in full for services canceled without 
appropriate advanced notice. 

55 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

56 For more information on media used during presentations, see the section on 
"Hosting Accessible Meetings and Events -- Audio and Visual Media" beginning 
on page 36 of this Handbook. For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-
mail addresses, see page 45 of this Handbook. 

57 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

58 For specific Security contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, 
see page 46 of this Handbook. 

59 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

60 For specific Security contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, 
see page 46 of this Handbook. 

61 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

62 In this section, the words, "meeting" and "event" will be used 
interchangeably to indicate assemblies under the auspices of the FCC. 

63 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1830(a). 

64 Audio/visual presentations can include, but are not limited to, the 
following: video presentations; audio clips; slides; overhead transparencies; 
PowerPoint or similar electronic presentations; diagrams or writing displayed 
on a poster, flipchart, whiteboard, or chalkboard. 

65 For specific FCC University contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail 
addresses, see page 46 of this Handbook. 

66 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794. 

67 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1801-1.1870. 

68 If consumers able to use a standard telephone are given contact numbers 
that are more specific than the general 1-888-CALL-FCC, then consumers who are 
deaf and hard of hearing must be given comparably specific contact numbers. 

69 Staff may notice that some messages received via TTY are written in non-
standard English. This is because English is not a first language for many 
people who are deaf. 

70 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

71 The Federal government maintains a separate relay service called the 
Federal Relay Service (FRS). FRS was established under Public Law 100-542, the 
Telecommunications Accessibility Act of 1988. It uses the Federal 
Telecommunication System (FTS2001), rather than commercial telephone networks, 
and may be used by Federal employees or the general public attempting to 
access Federal government resources. [From General Service Administration, 
Federal Relay Service (FRS), "What is the FRS?" 
http://www.fts.gsa.gov/frs/whatisfrs.htm (visited 11/7/02) and "Why Use the 
FRS?" http://www.fts.gsa.gov/frs/whyfrs.htm (visited 11/7/02).] 

72 47 U.S.C. Sec. 225; Implementing Regulations: 47 C.F.R. Sec. 64.601 et seq. 
(Title IV, FCC). 

73 For calls placed from the FCC, dial 9 first to get an outside line, then 
dial 711. 

74 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1801-1.1870. 

75 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1803. 

76 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

77 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1801-1.1870. 

78 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1803. 

79 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

80 Send ALL braille documents to the Accessible Format Specialist. He will 
determine if the form of braille used can be transcribed. 

81 Individuals may become certified braille transcribers by successfully 
completing the Library of Congress' certification program. For more 
information about the Library of Congress Braille Certification Program, 
contact the National Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, Braille 
Development Section, http://www.loc.gov/nls/bds.html (visited 11/1/02). 

82 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1801-1.1870. 

83 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1803. 

84 For specific contact names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses, see page 
45 of this Handbook. 

85 Throughout this document, the term American Sign Language or ASL should be 
understood to include all ASL cognates that are generally recognized in the 
United States. 

86 "Fully certified sign language interpreters" is intended to mean 
interpreters holding the Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf (RID) 
Certificate of Interpretation (CI), the RID Certificate of Transliteration 
(CT), the RID Comprehensive Skills Certificate (CSC), or the National 
Association of the Deaf (NAD) Level IV or V Certification. 

87 29 U.S.C. Sec. 701-797. 

88 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794. 

89 Excerpted and summarized from U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights 
Division, Disability Rights Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

90 FCC 87-108, General Docket No. 84-533. 

91 Amendment of Part 1, Subpart N of the Commission's Rules Concerning Non-
discrimination on the Basis of Disability in the Commission's Programs and 
Activities, Order, FCC 03-48 (2003). 

92 29 U.S.C. Sec. 791; Implementing Regulations: 29 C.F.R. Sec. 1613.203. 

93 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

94 29 U.S.C. Sec. 793; Implementing Regulations: 41 C.F.R. Part 60-741. 

95 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

96 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794d. 

97 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

98 42 U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq. 

99 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

100 Implementing regulation: 29 C.F.R. Parts 1630, 1602 (Title I, EEOC). 

101 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

102 Implementing Regulations: 28 C.F.R. Part 35 (Title II, Department of 
Justice); 49 C.F.R. Parts 27, 37, 38 (Title II, III, Department of 
Transportation). 

103 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

104 Implementing Regulations: 28 C.F.R. Part 35 (Title II, Department of 
Justice); 49 C.F.R. Parts 27, 37, 38 (Title II, III, Department of 
Transportation). 

105 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

106 Implementing Regulations:49 C.F.R. Parts 27, 37, 38 (Title II, III, 
Department of Transportation); 28 C.F.R. Part 36 (Title III, Department of 
Justice). 

107 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

108 Implementing Regulations: 47 C.F.R. Sec. 64.601 et seq. (Title IV, FCC). 

109 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 
 
110 See also "Telecommunications Act, Section 225" on page 70 of this 
Handbook. 

111 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4151 et seq.; Implementing Regulations: 41 C.F.R. Subpart 
101-19.6. 

112 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

113 47 U.S.C. Sec. 255, 251(a)(2). 

114 From U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights 
Section, "A Guide to Disability Rights Laws," 
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/cguide.htm (visited 10/31/02). 

115 See also "ADA Title IV: Telecommunications Relay Services on page 69 of 
this Handbook. 

116 47 U.S.C. Sec. 613. 

117 47 U.S.C. Sec. 613(f). 

118 47 C.F.R. Sec. 79.1. 

119 47 C.F.R. Sec. 79.3. 

120 Motion Picture Association of America, Inc. v. FCC, 309 F.3d 796 (D.C. 
Cir. 2002). 

121 47 U.S.C. Sec. 303, 330. 

122 47 U.S.C. Sec. 610. 

123 47 C.F.R. Sec. 68.316, 68.317. 

124 U.S. Census Bureau, Survey of Income and Program Participation, 
"Introduction to SIPP," http://www.sipp.census.gov/sipp/overview.html (visited 
11/1/02). 

125 Data in this chart was gathered from: U.S. Census Bureau, "Disability," 
Americans with Disabilities: 1997 (P70-73), 
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/disable/sipp/disab97/ds97t2.html (visited 
11/1/02). 

126 Extracted, with compiler additions, from the University of North Carolina 
at Wilmington, Disability Services, "Disability Terminology," 
http://www.uncwil.edu/stuaff/SDS/disterm.html (visited 11/1/02). 

127 Excerpted, with compiler revisions, from a list compiled from many sources 
by Karen Meyer of the National Center for Access Unlimited, a joint venture of 
the United Cerebral Palsy Association, Inc. and Adaptive Environments Center, 
Inc. http://www2.ucsc.edu/ada/ADAhints.html (visited 10/31/02). 

128 Excerpted with compiler edits from American Foundation for the Blind, 
Information Center, "Sensitivity to Blindness and Visual Impairments," 
http://www.afb.org/info_document_view.asp?documentid=911 (visited 11/1/02). 

129 Excerpted with compiler edits from University of Kentucky, Engaging 
Differences Project, "Etiquette: Someone who has a Speech Impairment," 
http://www.uky.edu/TLC/grants/uk_ed/interactiontips6.html (visited 11/1/02). 

130 Excerpted from Marta Vidal, "New Study On Fatigue Confirms Need for 
Working In Teams," Views, Volume 14, Issue 6, June 1997, pages 1, 43-45. 

131 References: Michelsen, Patricia. "Court Interpreting," The Court 
Management & Administration Report, 3:10-16, 1992. Obst, Harry. Letter to Mr. 
Edward Bava, District Court Administration Division, Administrative Office of 
the U.S. Courts, Washington, DC. June 11, 1996. 

132 Excerpted, with compiler additions, from the Registry of Interpreters for 
the Deaf (RID), "RID's Code of Ethics," http://www.rid.org/coe.html (visited 
11/2/02). 

133 Excerpted with compiler edits from Association of Science-Technology 
Centers, Accessible Practices, Best Practices, "Live and Recorded Media: 
Assistive Listening Devices," http://www.astc.org/resource/access/medald.htm 
(visited 11/1/02). 

134 The Commission is equipped with fixed FM assistive listening systems in 
the Commission Meeting Room and in Conference Room 1 on the 8th floor. In 
addition, there are 2 portable FM systems that can be used throughout the 
building and at remote locations. The systems are outfitted with microphones, 
earphones, and neckloops. (The microphones used with the portable systems 
transmit only to the assistive listening devices; they will not provide 
amplification to the room.) 

135 Excerpted with compiler additions from the National Court Reporters 
Association, CART Provider's Manual, 
http://cart.ncraonline.org/manual/index.html (visited 11/1/02). 

136 First and second paragraphs excerpted with compiler additions from 
Association of Science-Technology Centers, Accessible Practices, Best 
Practices, "Live and Recorded Media: Captioning," 
http://www.astc.org/resource/access/medcaption.htm (visited 11/2/02). 

137 Third and fourth paragraphs excerpted with compiler additions from Closed 
Captioning FAQ, "Captioning Overview: What Are Captions?" 
http://www.robson.org/capfaq/overview.html (visited 11/2/02). 

138 Excerpted with compiler additions from Closed Captioning FAQ, "Closed 
Captioning FAQs: Caption Styles," http://www.robson.org/capfaq/look.html 
(visited 11/2/02). 

139 Excerpted with compiler additions from Closed Captioning FAQ, "Online 
(Live) Captioning: How Are Realtime Captions Generated," 
http://www.robson.org/capfaq/online.html (visited 11/1/02). 

140 Excerpted with compiler additions from Media Access Group (The Caption 
Center), Resources, "Solving Caption Problems," 
http://main.wgbh.org/wgbh/pages/mag/resources/guides/mag_guide_vol9.html 
(visited 11/1/02). 

141 Excerpted with compiler edits from American Foundation for the Blind, 
Information Center, "What is Braille," 
http://www.afb.org/info_document_view.asp?documentid=1248 (visited 11/1/02). 

142 A sample page of braille with an English translation can be found in the 
Appendix of this Handbook. 

143 Excerpted with compiler additions from American Foundation for the Blind, 
Information Center, "Video Description," 
http://www.afb.org/info_document_view.asp?documentid=944 (visited 11/1/02). 

144 "Audio Description" is another term often used for this service. 

145 Excerpted with compiler additions from Graphic Artists Guild, "Disability 
Access Symbols," (symbols available in downloadable files from this site), 
http://www.gag.org/resources/das.php (visited 11/1/02). 

146 Id. 

147 Id. 

148 Id. 

149 FCC uses the term "Video Description." 

150 Excerpted with compiler additions from Graphic Artists Guild, "Disability 
Access Symbols," (symbols available in downloadable files from this site), 
http://www.gag.org/resources/das.php (visited 11/1/02). Second graphic ("D" 
with radiating arcs) from WGBH, Services for Hire, "Access Symbols," 
http://main.wgbh.org/wgbh/hire/symbols.html (visited 11/1/02). 

151 From Graphic Artists Guild, "Disability Access Symbols," (symbols 
available in downloadable files from this site), 
http://www.gag.org/resources/das.php (visited 11/1/02). 

152 Excerpted with compiler additions from Closed Captioning FAQ, "Closed 
Captioning Overview: Why are there different icons to denote captioned 
programs?" http://www.robson.org/capfaq/overview.html#icons (visited 11/1/02). 

153 From Graphic Artists Guild, "Disability Access Symbols," (symbols 
available in downloadable files from this site), 
http://www.gag.org/resources/das.php (visited 11/1/02). 

154 Excerpted with compiler additions from Graphic Artists Guild, "Disability 
Access Symbols," (symbols available in downloadable files from this site), 
http://www.gag.org/resources/das.php (visited 11/1/02). 

155 Id. 

156 Excerpted from WGBH, Service for Hire, "Access Symbols," 
http://main.wgbh.org/wgbh/hire/symbols.html (visited 11/4/02). 

157 The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Pub.L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394, 29 U.S.C. 
794, as amended by the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974, Pub.L. 93-516, 
88 Stat. 1617, and the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and 
Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, Pub.L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955, 
and the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986, Sec. 103(d), Pub.L. 99-506, 100 
Stat. 1810, creates specific causes of action for persons who are aggrieved by 
discriminatory treatment as defined in the Act.  

158 Amendment of Part 1 of the Commission's Rules to Implement Section 504 of 
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794, Gen. Docket 
No. 84-533, Report and Order, 2 FCC Rcd 2199 (1987) (Report and Order). 

159 See Report and Order at 2199, par. 2. 

160 42 U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq. 

161 The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Pub.L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394, 29 U.S.C. 
794, as amended by the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974, Pub.L. 93-516, 
88 Stat. 1617, and the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and 
Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978, Pub.L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955, 
and the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986, sec. 103(d), Pub.L. 99-506, 100 
Stat. 1810, creates specific causes of action for persons who are aggrieved by 
discriminatory treatment as defined in the Act.  

162 Even if the request for accommodation is made less than five days before 
the relevant event, the Commission will make every effort to secure the 
services of a person to provide the requested assistance. 

163 5 U.S.C. Sec. 553(b)(3)(A). 

164 See 5 U.S.C. Sec. 553(d). 




[Back cover]

Federal Communications Commission
Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau
445 12th St. S.W.
Washington, DC 20554
1-888-CALL-FCC (1-888-225-5322)
TTY: 1-888-TELL-FCC (1-888-835-5322)
www.fcc.gov/cgb/


