SEC-225 -- TENANT AND PARTICIPANT PROTECTIONS.


 (a) Lease.-The lease between a tenant and an owner of affordable
housing assisted under this title for rental shall be for not less than
one year, unless by mutual agreement between the tenant and the owner,
and shall contain such terms and conditions as the Secretary shall
determine to be appropriate.

 (b) Termination of Tenancy.-An owner shall not terminate the tenancy
or refuse to renew the lease of a tenant of rental housing assisted
under this title except for serious or repeated violation of the terms
and conditions of the lease, for violation of applicable Federal, State,
or local law, or for other good cause. Any termination or refusal to
renew must be preceded by not less than 30 days by the owner's service
upon the tenant of a written notice specifying the grounds for the
action.

 (c) Maintenance and Replacement.-The owner of rental housing assisted
under this title shall maintain the premises in compliance with all
applicable housing quality standards and local code requirements.

 (d) Tenant Selection.-The owner of rental housing assisted under this
title shall adopt written tenant selection policies and criteria that-

 (1) are consistent with the purpose of providing housing for very
low-income and low-income families,

 (2) are reasonably related to program eligibility and the applicant's
ability to perform the obligations of the lease,

 (3) give reasonable consideration to the housing needs of families that
would have a preference under section 6(c)(4)(A) of the United States
Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437d(c)(4)(A)), and

 (4) provide for (A) the selection of tenants from a written waiting list
in the chronological order of their application, insofar as is
practicable, and (B) for the prompt notification in writing of any
rejected applicant of the grounds for any rejection.


