                                                  Order 95-6-13
                                             Served June 8,1995
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                               
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Issued by the Department of Transportation
on the 8 th day of June, 1995

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Applications of                         : 
                                        :
     BRITISH AIRWAYS PLC                :    DOCKETS 48640
                                        :            49086
for exemptions under 49 U.S.C. 40109    :            49381
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Applications of                         :
                                        :
     USAIR, INC.                        :    UNDOCKETED
                                        :
for Statements of Authorization under Part 207 of the  :
Department's Regulations to code share with British         :
Airways PLC                                  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

ORDER

Summary

By this order we renew the regulatory authorities granted British
Airways PLC and USAir, Inc. to engage in code-share operations
involving 66 interior U.S. cities served through British Airways'
U.S. gateways and the Philadelphia-Mexico City market.  We also
grant the necessary regulatory authorities for the carriers to
expand their code-share operations to 65 additional U.S. cities
and 7 international cities.  The authorities are effective
immediately for a period of two years from the date of service of
this order.

Background

By Orders 93-3-17, 93-11-26, and 93-12-34, the Department granted
British Airways and USAir the necessary regulatory authorities to
conduct code-sharing services to various points in the United
States in conjunction with British Airways' services between the
United Kingdom and its authorized U.S. gateways.  In addition, on
January 7, 1994, we granted USAir a Statement of Authorization to
conduct code-sharing service with British Airways in the
Philadelphia-Mexico City market.  All of these operations were
approved through March 17, 1994.  By Order 94-3-31, the
Department renewed these authorities through March 17, 1995.

Applications

On January 13, 1995, British Airways and USAir filed for renewal
of the necessary regulatory authorities to continue the
code-share services previously authorized by the Department. 1 
These points are listed in Appendix A.  In addition, British
Airways and USAir had previously filed applications to expand
their code-share operations to include 65 additional U.S. points
and 7 foreign points as described in Appendix B.  In support of
their applications British Airways and USAir state that both the
existing and expanded code-share operations are specifically
provided for in the 1991 U.S. -U.K. Memorandum of Consultations
and provide significant benefits to the public. 2

Responsive Pleadings 3

American Airlines, Inc. filed an objection to the renewal
applications.  Replies to American's answer were filed by British
Airways, USAir, and the City of Philadelphia, Division of
Aviation.  American filed a reply to the answer of USAir. 
American and Delta filed answers opposing the expanded code-share
services.  

American and Delta focus their objections on the state of
U.S.-U.K. aviation negotiations at the time of their submissions. 
American also makes arguments concerning proposed service
increases by British Airways at Philadelphia and their asserted
impact on American's Philadelphia-London services.  USAir,
British Airways, and Philadelphia respond to these points.

Recent Developments

In a Memorandum of Consultations dated June 5, 1995,
representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom
reached understandings involving certain amendments to the Air
Services Agreement (Agreement) between the countries providing
benefits for both sides. The MOC further provides that the
provisions of the amendments can be implemented on the basis of
comity and reciprocity pending an Exchange of Notes, upon
approval of all outstanding applications to conduct code-sharing
services permitted by the Agreement.  In this regard, the MOC
notes that U.S. delegation assured the U.K. delegation that all
pending U.K. code-share applications would be approved within
seven days of the effective date of the MOC.  Moreover, paragraph
6 of the Draft Exchange of Notes attached to the MOC includes a
new provision to the effect that approvals of these applications
will be for at least two years.

Decision

We have decided to renew the code-share authorities last approved
by the Department by Order 94-3-31 and to grant the regulatory
authorities necessary for the expanded code-share operations
proposed by the applicants to serve additional U.S. and
international cities. 4  The authorities are effective
immediately and will remain in effect for two years from the date
of service of this order.

The recent MOC contains an explicit assurance that these
applications would be approved within seven days.  Furthermore,
the code-share operations at issue provide significant service
benefits to the public by providing numerous communities with
additional, and in some markets, more convenient alternatives for
service between the United States and the United Kingdom.  In
these circumstances, we find that approval of the requested
authorities by final order is consistent with the public
interest.  Against this background, none of the arguments offered
by the objecting parties persuades us to adopt a contrary result. 


ACCORDINGLY,

1.  We renew the exemption authority of British Airways PLC and
the Statements of Authorization granted USAir, Inc. to conduct
the code-share services previously authorized by Order 94-4-31;

2.  We renew the Statement of Authorization granted USAir, Inc.
to code-share with British Airways in the Philadelphia-Mexico
City market, previously authorized by Order 94-4-31;

3.  We grant British Airways an exemption under 49 U.S.C. section
40109 to the extent necessary to engage in the code-share
operations between points in the United Kingdom, on the one hand,
and points in the United States and certain foreign points, on
the other, served through British Airways' U.S. gateways as set
forth in Appendix B;

4.  We grant USAir, Inc. a Statement of Authorization under Part
207 of the Department's regulations to engage in the code-share
operations with British Airways involving the U.S. and foreign
points set forth in Appendix B of this order;

5.  The authorities granted in ordering paragraphs 1-4 are
effective immediately and will remain in effect for two years
from the date of service of this order;

6.  In the conduct of these services, we expect British Airways
to adhere to the applicable terms, conditions, and limitations of
its foreign air carrier permit (Order 93-8-44);

7.  We require British Airways and USAir to comply with 14 CFR
399.88 of the Department's regulations and any amendments to the
Department's regulations concerning code-sharing arrangements
that may be adopted;

8.  The Statements of Authorization granted by this order are
subject to the further condition that the subject foreign air
transportation be sold in the name of the carrier holding out
such service in computer reservation systems and elsewhere, and
that the carrier selling such transportation accept all
obligations established in its contract of carriage with the
passenger ( i.e., the ticket);

9.  We grant all motions for leave to file otherwise unauthorized
documents in the captioned proceedings; and

10.  We will serve this order on British Airways PLC; USAir,
Inc.; Delta Air Lines, Inc.; American Airlines, Inc.; the City of
Philadelphia, Division of Aviation; the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Washington,
D.C.; the Department of State (Office of Aviation Negotiations);
and the Federal Aviation Administration.

By:



                              PATRICK V. MURPHY
                              Acting Assistant Secretary for
Aviation 
                                and International Affairs

(SEAL)

1 British Airways and USAir filed timely applications for renewal
of their authorities.  These authorities have remained in effect
pending action on the renewal applications under the provisions
of 5 U.S.C. 558(c).
2  The applicants cite the new Paragraph 11 of Section 5 of Annex
1 for the intra-U.S. code-share services and Paragraph 10 of
Section 5 of Annex 1 with respect to the code-share services
involving foreign points, which are set out in the 1991 MOC.
3  Various pleadings in the captioned proceedings were
accompanied by motions for leave to file.  We will grant the
motions.
4  We find that British Airways is operationally and financially
qualified to provide the services at issue based on the May 25,
1989, Exchange of Notes between the United States and the United
Kingdom, T.I.A.S. 11675, under which the aviation authorities of
each country will normally accept, on a reciprocal basis, the
other's fitness determinations in regard to carriers seeking
authority to conduct certain bilateral services, including the
requested authority.  See Order 93-8-44.

