
   QUALITY INNS INTERNATIONAL, INC., ET AL., PETITIONERS V. L.B.H.
ASSOCIATES LIMITED PARTNERSHIP AND FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
CORPORATION

   No. 90-664

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1990

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Fourth Circuit

   Brief For The Federal Respondent In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-16a) is not
reported.  The opinions of the district court and the bankruptcy court
(Pet. App. 17a-65a) are unreported.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 26, 1990.
The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on October 23, 1990.
The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the debtor's plan of reorganization under Chapter 11 of the
Bankruptcy Code satisfied the absolute priority rule when petitioners'
unsecured interests were not paid in full, but the debtor's general
partners who retained their partnership interests were required to
reduce their senior secured claims or to make an equivalent cash
contribution.

                               STATEMENT

   1. L.B.H. Associates Limited Partnership (L.B.H.) filed a petition
for reorganization under Chapter 11 in the United States Bankruptcy
Court for the District of Maryland.  The sole asset owned by L.B.H.
was the Lord Baltimore Hotel, which was operated by petitioners under
a Management Contract and Franchise Agreement (Agreement).  In
connection with the bankruptcy, L.B.H. moved to terminate the
Agreement with petitioners.  L.B.H. also filed several plans for
reorganization.  The bankruptcy court confirmed the third such plan,
over petitioners' objections.  Pet. App. 3a-4a, 45a, 49a, 54a-55a,
61a.  /1/

   L.B.H.'s reorganization plan divides creditors' claims into several
classes.  Class 7 consists of the secured claims of L.B.H.'s general
partners.  Class 10 consists of the unsecured claims of petitioners.
Class 14 consists of claims representing the partnership interests
owned by L.B.H.'s general partners.  Under the plan, L.B.H.'s general
partners may retain their partnership interests in Class 14 in
exchange for the partners' reduction of their Class 7 claims by
$262,500, their provision of a contribution in cash in that amount, or
their provision of any combination of cash and reduction of Class 7
claims totalling that amount.  Petitioners objected to this aspect of
the plan, contending that it violates the "absolute priority rule."
Pet. App. 8a-9a, 33a.

   The absolute priority rule as embodied in the Bankruptcy Code
provides that with respect to dissenting unsecured claims that are
impaired by the plan of reorganization, a plan shall not be approved
unless it is "fair and equitable," a condition that includes the
requirement that

         (i) the plan provides that each holder of a claim of such
      class receive or retain on account of such claim property of a
      value, as of the effective date of the plan, equal to the
      allowed amount of such claim;  or

         (ii) the holder of any claim or interest that is junior to
      the claims of such class will not receive or retain under the
      plan on account of such junior claim or interest any property.

11 U.S.C. 1129(b)(2)(B)(i) and (ii).  In essence, a plan that
diminishes the value of senior creditors' unsecured claims may not be
"crammed down" over their objections unless the plan eliminates the
interests of junior creditors.  Petitioners argued that L.B.H.'s plan
improperly permits the general partners to retain interests that are
junior to petitioners', while petitioners' claims were not being paid
in full.  The bankruptcy court rejected that argument, finding that
the general partners "will not receive or retain under the Plan any
property on account of such junior claim or interest." Pet. App. 57a.

   2. The district court likewise disagreed with petitioners'
objection based on the absolute priority rule, and it affirmed the
bankruptcy court's confirmation of the plan.  Pet. App. 17a-37a.
Although agreeing with petitioners that their claims were not being
paid in full while the general partners were being allowed to retain
their partnership interests, the court believed that the plan
satisfied an exception to the absolute priority rule.  The court
explained that petitioners had failed "to take into account that in
order to retain these interests the general partners must pay cash or
give up the equivalent in secured claims." Consequently, the general
partners were "required to put in new money or money value into the
estate for the benefit of other creditors." Id. at 33a.  The court
rejected petitioners' argument that the contribution made by the
general partners here was analogous to the "sweat equity" contribution
that this Court found insufficient in Norwest Bank Worthington v.
Ahlers, 485 U.S. 197 (1988), to justify allowing the owners of a
bankrupt enterprise to retain an interest in the enterprise despite
creditors' objections.  Pet. App. 33a.

   3. The court of appeals affirmed in an unpublished, per curiam
decision.  Pet. App. 1a-16a.  Although petitioners raised six issues
on appeal, they did not question the concept that owners who
contribute "new money" may retain their interests under an exception
to the absolute priority rule.  Rather, petitioners objected to the
general partners' retention of their interests solely on the theory
that the particular contribution required in this case did not
constitute "a contribution of new money or money's worth within the
exception to the absolute priority rule." Pet. C.A. Br. 27-28;  Pet.
C.A. Reply Br. 11-13.

   The court of appeals rejected that contention, explaining that the
general partners received their partnership interests in exchange for
a capital contribution of $262,500, consisting of any combination of
cash and reduction of the Class 7 claims.  Pet. App. 9a.  The $262,500
contribution, the court thought, validated the partners'retention of
their interests because it constituted "a current contribution of
'money or money's worth,'" ibid. (citing Case v. Los Angeles Lumber
Products Co., 308 U.S. 106, 121-122 (1939)), and because the
contribution was "necessary" to the success of the reorganization.
Pet. App. 9a (citing "projected cash flow statements").

                               ARGUMENT

   Petitioners contend (Pet. 4-9) that, on the particular facts of
this case, the court of appeals misapplied the doctrine that the
contribution of "money or money's worth" may permit the owners of a
bankrupt enterprise to retain their interests despite the objection of
senior creditors whose claims are not paid in full.  The court's
rejection of that factbound contention, announced in its unpublished
decision, raises no issue worthy of this Court's review.

   1. The absolute priority rule expresses the policy that dissenting,
unsecured creditors must be paid in full before a junior interest can
receive or retain property by virtue of a plan of reorganization.
Norwest Bank Worthington v. Ahlers, 485 U.S. 197, 202 (1988).  The
requirements of the absolute priority rule are now embodied in Chapter
11 of the Bankruptcy Code, enacted in 1978.  11 U.S.C.
1129(b)(2)(B)(ii).  Before the enactment of the Code, this Court
suggested that an exception to the absolute priority rule would exist
when the owners of the bankrupt enterprise make a contribution of
"money or money's worth, reasonably equivalent in view of all the
circumstances to (their) participation," and when equity holder
participation is necessary to gain the infusion of new capital into
the enterprise.  Case v. Los Angeles Lumber Products, Co., 308 U.S.
106, 117, 121-122 (1939) (dicta).  In such a case, the Court
explained, the equity holder may participate in the reorganized
enterprise even though the claims of creditors are not fully honored
and those creditors do not consent to such participation.

   In Norwest Bank Worthington v. Ahlers, 485 U.S. 197 (1988), this
Court assumed, without deciding, that the exception described in Los
Angeles Lumber survived the enactment of the Bankruptcy Code, but the
Court went on to hold that it did not apply to an owner's commitment
to contribute "labor, experience, and expertise" in running the
enterprise under reorganization.  Id. at 203 & n.3.  The Court
explained that those forms of contribution were inadequate to satisfy
the new-value exception to the absolute priority rule discussed in Los
Angeles Lumber because the "promise of future services is intangible,
inalienable, and, in all likelihood, unenforceable." 485 U.S. at 204.
Rather than constituting an infusion of capital that immediately
enhances the enterprise's value, "a promise of future services cannot
be exchanged in any market for something of value to the creditors
today." Ibid.

   Petitioners rely (Pet. 6-7) on Norwest Bank Worthington in arguing
that the "particular plan" approved in this case does not involve an
infusion of new capital into the debtor.  Petitioners do not contend
that the cash contribution contemplated as one option under the plan
would not be "money or money's worth" for purposes of the Los Angeles
Lumber exception.  Rather, they argue that the option for the owners
to cancel their secured claims is not new value that allows them to
retain their equity interests.

   But the forgiveness of a higher priority debt may constitute
"money's worth" within the meaning of the Los Angeles Lumber
exception.  As the court explained in In re Future Energy Corp., 83
Bankr. 470, 498 (Bankr. S.D. Ohio 1988), "if the transaction in
question both benefits the debtor and places the shareholder in a
position of economic risk, a capital contribution within the meaning
of (Los Angeles Lumber) and its progeny shall be deemed to have been
made." Future Energy Corp. held that the forgiveness of secured debt
benefits the debtor and imposes economic risk on the owner, thus
satisfying the requirements of a capital contribution for purposes of
the "money's worth" exception.  83 Bankr. at 498.  The same analysis
applies here.  The general partners of L.B.H. were given the option of
relinquishing secured claims, senior to petitioners' claims, as a
condition of retaining their ownership interests.  By cancelling their
security interests and accompanying claims on the debtor's assets, the
general partners contributed "money or money's worth" to the debtor
just as surely as if they had paid money into the debtor's estate for
it to use in extinguishing the secured debt.

   The surrender of secured debt here bears scant resemblance to the
promise of future services found wanting in Norwest Bank Worthington
v. Ahlers.  In that case, the owners of the enterprise were
essentially offering nothing but their willingness to continue working
towards the success of the venture under reorganization.  Such an
interest cannot be translated into a quantifiable benefit to the
creditors of the enterprise;  as the Court explained, it is not an
asset that can be booked on the entity's balance sheet.  485 U.S. at
204.  But the forgiveness of higher-priority secured debt immediately
frees up an asset for inclusion on the entity's books, because it
removes the lienholders' interest in the property in question.  Where,
as here, "these contributions are necessary to the success of the
undertaking," Pet. App. 9a, they satisfy the exception to the absolute
priority rule as delineated by Los Angeles Lumber.  /2/

   2. A more important issue -- not raised by petitioners -- is
whether the Los Angeles Lumber exception to the absolute priority rule
survives the enactment of the Bankruptcy Code.

   In Norwest Bank Worthington v. Ahlers, we argued that this "money
or money's worth" exception was eliminated by the Bankruptcy Code.
This Court concluded that the exception did not apply on the facts of
that case, and left for another day the issue of "the continuing
vitality of the Los Angeles Lumber exception." 485 U.S. at 203 n.3.
We continue to believe that the Bankruptcy Code abolished the "money
or money's worth" exception, but, for three reasons, we do not believe
that that issue warrants review here.

   First, petitioners have never raised the question of whether a
"money or money's worth" exception exists, as opposed to how it
applies in this case.  The thrust of petitioners' argument has been to
acknowledge the validity of the exception, but then quarrel about its
dimensions and requirements.  See Pet. C.A. Br. 27-28;  Pet. C.A.
Reply Br. 11-13.  /3/ Accordingly, the court of appeals was given no
reason to consider the deeper issue of whether the Bankruptcy Code
changed the legal context in which the absolute priority rule
operates, with the effect of rejecting the dicta in Los Angeles
Lumber.  Understandably, the Fourth Circuit's per curiam opinion does
not allude to that issue.

   Nor does the petition present the question of whether the "money or
money's worth" exception enjoys continuing validity.  Rather, the
petition assumes that the exception is valid, and then goes on to
discuss its contours and rationale.  Pet. 6.  In light of petitioners'
failure to challenge the existence of the exception, this Court may
deem that contention waived.  The "general rule" is that "a federal
appellate court does not consider an issue not passed upon below,"
Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 120 (1976), and there is nothing
exceptional about this case that warrants departure from that
principle.  See Hormel v. Helvering, 312 U.S. 552, 557 (1941).

   Second, the courts of appeals have had comparatively few
opportunities to consider the issue left open in Norwest Bank
Worthington, and it has as yet generated no conflict in the circuits.
/4/ One court of appeals recently urged the view that the Los Angeles
Lumber exception does not survive the Code, but the court "stop(ped)
short" of deciding that question because it concluded that the value
contributed in that case did not satisfy the "money or money's worth"
requirement as expressed in Norwest Bank Worthington.  Kham & Nate's
Shoes No. 2, Inc. v. First Bank of Whiting, 908 F.2d 1351, 1359-1363
(7th Cir. 1990);  see also In re Stegall, 865 F.2d 140, 142-144 (7th
Cir. 1989).  Other circuits, like the Fourth Circuit here, have
apparently not focused on the question.  See, e.g., In re Blankemeyer,
861 F.2d 192, 194 (8th Cir. 1988) (finding owner's proposed
contribution inadequate to justify retention of ownership interest
without questioning the validity of Los Angeles Lumber).  Although we
believe that this Court should review the validity of that exception
in an appropriate case, absent a conflict in the circuits we see no
pressing need to do so here.

   Third, although it is our view that the exception to the absolute
priority rule applied by the court of appeals is not a valid one, we
do not suggest that the Court remand the case for further
consideration of that issue.  Because the Fourth Circuit's unpublished
decision establishes no precedent, the opinion below will not hinder
reconsideration of the "money's worth" exception when a dissenting
creditor actually chooses to litigate that issue, as petitioners did
not.  And, as a prudential matter, it is quite late in the day to
unravel the reorganization plan adopted in this case.  /5/

   Litigation by petitioners challenging the reorganization has been
protracted and vigorous.  As the district court ruefully observed,
objections (by petitioners and others) proliferated "because there
seems to have been a scorched earth policy in the litigation of this
case." Pet. App. 19a.  Petitioners have resisted the bankruptcy
court's effort to make the Lord Baltimore Hotel function again as a
viable economic entity, through numerous appeals, raising numerous
issues.  In a careful opinion, the court of appeals rejected each of
the many claims that petitioners urged upon it, as had the district
court before it.  At this juncture, the settled expectations of the
parties, and the long efforts devoted to making the reorganization a
success, weigh against reversing the judgment for consideration of a
legal issue that petitioners have never elected to assert.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   ALFRED J.T. BYRNE

      General Counsel

   ANN S. DUROSS

      Assistant General Counsel

   COLLEEN B. BOMBARDIER

      Senior Counsel

   GREGORY E. GORE

      Counsel Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

   JANUARY 1991

   /1/ The FDIC particpated in the reorganization proceedings because
it holds mortgages or liens on property of the Lord Baltimore Hotel.
Pet. App. 28a-29a, 57a.

   /2/ Although petitioners assert (Pet. 9) a need for this Court's
guidance on the implications of the Los Angeles Lumber exception, only
two cases of which we are aware have involved the question of whether
the cancellation of secured debt satisfies that exception -- this
decision and Future Energy Corp.  We see no need for the Court to
clarify the scope of Los Angeles Lumber in such a comparatively
unusual setting, where no conflict of authority is even alleged to
exist.

   /3/ The FDIC, represented by outside counsel without the
participation of the Department of Justice, confronted petitioners'
arguments on their own terms, and did not raise the question of
whether the Los Angeles Lumber exception survived the enactment of the
Bankruptcy Code.

   /4/ As the Court noted in Norwest Bank Worthington, bankruptcy
judges have been divided on the issue for some time.  485 U.S. at
203-204 n.3.

   /5/ The bankruptcy judge observed that "(a)ll of us have invested
parts of our lives in this case.  I will always remember 1988 as the
year of the Lord Baltimore case." Pet. App. 50a.
