Ochoco Lumber Company, No. 3812 (August 12, 1993)
Docket No. SIZ-93-6-9-66


                    UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                  SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

                 OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS

                        WASHINGTON, D.C.


SIZE APPEAL OF:                    )
                                   )
Ochoco Lumber Company              )
                                   )
     Appellant                     )
                                   ) Docket No. SIZ-93-6-9-66
Re: Snow Mountain Pine, Ltd.       )
                                   )
Indigo Robinson Salvage Timber     )
  Sale                             )
Freemont National Forest, Oregon   )

                             DIGEST

Absent a compelling reason to determine otherwise, the general
partner(s) will be found to control a limited partnership.  The
newly organized rule may be applied to a change in general
partners for a protested concern organized as a limited
partnership.

The language of both the newly organized concern rule and the
identity of interests rule admits of exceptions to their literal
application where the circumstances suggest that a finding of
affiliation would not be reasonable.

                            DECISION
                                
                         August 12, 1993

PHILLIPS, Administrative Judge, Presiding:

Jurisdiction

This appeal is decided under the Small Business Act of 1958, 15
U.S.C. 631 et seq., and the regulations codified at 13 CFR Part
121.

Issues

Whether the limited partners who are owners of the former
general partner presently have an identity of interests with the
limited partnership's current management.

Whether the amended limited partnership agreement precludes the
owner of the general partner or its managers who hold limited
partnership interests from voting on the question of removing
the general partner.

Whether the newly organized concern rule applies where there has
been a change in the identity of the general partner of a
limited partnership.

Facts

On June 9, 1993, Ochoco Lumber Company (Ochoco) filed an appeal
of the May 5, 1993 Seattle Regional Office determination that
Snow Mountain Pine, Ltd. (SMP) is small under the 500-employee
size standard applicable to the captioned timber sale. 1/ This
determination is the latest of four that have been issued
concerning SMP during the last three years. The first was issued
in 1990. In it, SMP's general partner at that time, Snow
Mountain Pine Corporation (SMP Corp), was found to be owned and
controlled by William Walsh, Robert Ferris and John Lillie and
to be affiliated with several other firms over which Walsh and
Ferris exercised control as parties having an identity of
interests based on common investments, including Sequoia
Associates. Because SMP Corp was found to control SMP as its
general partner, SMP too was found to be affiliated with those
other concerns. However, their combined number of employees
(408) did not exceed the 500-employee size standard, and SMP was
found to be a small business, in consequence.

Ochoco first challenged SMP's size status on December 22, 1992,
alleging that Walsh, Ferris and Lillie also have an identity of
interests with J. Frank Leach, a director of SMP Corp and a
partner in Sequoia Associates, affiliating SMP with Acme Fixture
and Casework, Inc., which is allegedly controlled by Leach, and
Pacific Fruit Growers and Packers, Inc., controlled by all
three, and increasing SMP's number of employees to 880. Ochoco also
alleged that this triumvirate, "in their own right and together
with other associates" controls an additional 1,290 employees
through their holdings in Timberjack Corporation and Champion
Road Machinery, Ltd. and a possible additional 5,353 employees
through Walsh's alleged identity of interest with Richard Blum,
the owner of two other firms, National Education Corporation and
URS Corporation. SMP declined to respond to Ochoco's allegations
based upon an imminent restructuring that it alleged would
render any valid bases for objection to its size status moot,
and on January 11, 1993, the Regional Office found SMP to be
other than small based upon its refusal to supply the
information requested.

Two weeks later, on January 28, 1993, SMP applied for recertifi
cation based upon the following "significant change in the
control and management" of SMP:

     Graves Corporation, of Hines, Oregon, has succeeded Snow
     Mountain Pine Corporation as the sole general partner under
     an Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement
     ("Agreement") dated December 31, 1992. This Agreement (1)
     vests full and exclusive control over the business of the
     partnership in the general partner, Agreement at Sections
     4, 12; and (2) requires an 85 per cent majority of the
     limited partner voting interests to change the general
     partner, Agreement at Sections 3, 14. Because management
     shareholders and the general partner own more than 15 per
     cent of Snow Mountain [Pine, Ltd.], management has absolute
     control of Snow Mountain [Pine, Ltd.].
     
     Graves Corporation as general partner owns one per cent of
     the equity of Snow Mountain [Pine, Ltd.]. Graves
     Corporation is wholly owned by the Graves Family Trust
     dated August 26, 1987. Graves Family Trust owns as a
     limited partner 9.1 per cent of the voting power of the
     limited partners. Donald A. Graves and JoAnn Graves are the
     joint trustees of that trust. The directors of Graves
     Corporation are Donald A. Graves, JoAnn Graves (wife of
     Donald A. Graves), Lani Trout (daughter of JoAnn Graves),
     Scott D. Olmstead and Travis A. Huntley. Neither Graves
     Corporation nor Graves Family Trust has any employees.
     Donald A. Graves is the president of Snow Mountain [Pine,
     Ltd.].
     
     Marshall C. Brown, Travis A. Huntley, John B. Maple and
     Scott D. Olmstead each are vice presidents of Snow Mountain
     [Pine, Ltd.] and, with Donald A. Graves, constitute the
     management of Snow Mountain [Pine,Ltd.]. Brown, Huntley,
     Maple and Olmstead each own 2 per cent of the voting power
     of the limited partners, or 8 per cent in the aggregate.
     These ownerships of Graves, Brown, Huntley, Maple and
     Olmstead total 17.1 per cent, sufficient to provide complete
     control for their management through the general partner.

     In addition, Donald A. Graves, Brown, Huntley, Maple and
     Olmstead are the officers and directors of Snow Mountain
     Investment, Inc., which owns 13.9 per cent of the voting
     interest of Snow Mountain. Snow Mountain Investment, Inc.,
     has no employees. Snow Mountain Investment is owned by nine
     investors who have no other relation to Snow Mountain
     [Pine, Ltd.] and whose direction to the officers and
     directors of Snow Mountain Investment, Inc., is neither
     needed nor able to control Snow Mountain.
     
     None from among Donald A. Graves, JoAnn Graves, Trout,
     Brown, Huntley, Maple or Olmstead has an affiliation with
     any other business entity. Thus, there is no other entity
     whose employees should be combined with Snow Mountain's to
     determine Snow Mountain's size status....
     
     Snow Mountain Pine Corporation, the former general partner,
     is now known as WLF Company. WLF Company exercises no
     management rights or control over the partnership and has
     no ability to do so. It is owned by William Walsh, Robert
     Ferris and John Lillie. None is an owner, director or
     officer of Graves Corporation. Each retains a limited
     partnership in Snow Mountain [Pine Ltd.], but under the
     terms of the present partnership agreement, their voting
     interest is not sufficient to exercise control over the
     general partner and management either individually or in
     combination with each other, or even in combination with
     all nonmanagement partners, including Snow Mountain
     Investment, Inc. As a result, any affiliations of Walsh,
     Ferris or Lillie are not relevant to a determination of
     Snow Mountain's size status.

SMP reported 140 employees during the relevant accounting
period. Upon inquiry of the Regional Office, SMP indicated that
it has a "one-year contract for financial consulting services
with Sequoia Associates, a firm owned by Robert Ferris and
William Walsh, who are also non-controlling limited partners in
[SMP];" that Lillie is a director of two other companies and
does not own more than ten percent of any firm; and that Ferris
and Walsh own 42.86 and 52.14 percent, respectively, of Sequoia
and are both directors of Newell Industrial Corporation and of
Champion Road Machinery, Ltd. (of which Walsh owns 15.9 percent
of the stock).

Based upon this information, the Regional Office found that SMP
is controlled by its general partner, the Graves Corporation,
(Graves), that it is affiliated with Snow Mountain Investment,
Inc. based on common management, and that, based on their
aggregated numbers of employees, SMP should be recertified under
the 500-employee size standard, effective February 25, 1993. 2/

On April 2, 1993, Modoc Lumber Company (Modoc) filed a size
protest against SMP in connection with the captioned timber
sale, contending that SMP continues to be affiliated with the
Walsh, Ferris and Lillie group (Walsh group) of companies,
despite its recent restructuring. Citing Size Appeal of
Interactive Resources. Inc., No. 3168 (1989) in support, Modoc
contends that the presumption of control accorded Graves as
SMP's general partner has been rebutted by the continuing
business connections and identity of interests among those
limited partners associated with the Walsh group, the extent of
which suggests that this group, rather than the Graves
management group holding just over 15 percent of SMP's voting
power, controls SMP. Modoc also alleged that SMP continues to be
affiliated with SMP Corp, now WLF Investment Corp (WLF), and the
Walsh group, under the newly organized concern rule in 13 CFR
121.401(j), which provides as follows:

     Affiliation generally arises where former officers,
     directors, principal stockholders, and/or key employees of
     one concern organize a new concern in the same or a related
     industry or field of operation, and serve as its officers,
     directors, principal stockholders, and/or key employees,
     and the one concern is furnishing or will furnish the other
     concern with subcontracts, financial or technical
     assistance, bid or performance bond indemnification, and/or
     other facilities, whether for a fee or otherwise.

Modoc pointed out that Graves was recently organized, in
January, 1993, that its principals, Graves, Olmstead and
Huntley, were former officers and key employees of SMP Corp,
that both SMP Corp and Graves are engaged in the forestry
industry, and that Sequoia's provision of financial consulting
services and the capital infusion by the limited partners
controlled by the Walsh group constitutes "financial assistance"
within the meaning of the regulation. Modoc argued that, since
there is no "clear line of fracture" between SMP Corp and Graves,
Graves is a "newly organized concern" affiliated with SMP Corp
and that all affiliates of SMP Corp and the Walsh group continue
to be affiliated with SMP through its new general partner and to
disqualify it, based on their added numbers of employees, as
small under the 500-employee size standard.

Ochoco filed a second size protest against SMP on April 6, 1993.
Ochoco, too, alleged that SMP continues to be affiliated with
SMP Corp/WLF, notwithstanding the restructuring, and with
several other companies controlled by the Walsh group, based on
the newly organized concern rule, under which both Graves and
SMP can be considered newly organized; on the fact that SMP
Corp/WLF is essentially SMP's "guarantor" because it "remains
the debtor for all of Snow Mountain's outstanding financial
obligations, including its sawmill equipment," negotiated during
SMP Corp's tenure as SMP's general partner; on the fact that
members of the Walsh group, including the Ferris, Leach, Lillie
and Walsh Family Trusts, are the principal beneficiaries of the
limited partnership 3/ (citing Size Appeal of Allen and Hoshall.
Ltd., No. 3637 (1992)); and on the fact that Ferris and Walsh
remain involved in SMP's financial management through their
ownership of Sequoia. Ochoco also challenged SMP's assertion
that the Graves management group controls removal of Graves as
the general partner through its ownership of over 15 percent of
SMP's voting power, noting that there is no agreement requiring
"management" to vote as a block to prevent Graves' ouster.
Ochoco requested that SMP be required to provide information on
all general and limited partners' affiliations with other firms
on its SBA Form 355, so as to assess which of these companies is
also affiliated with SMP.

The Regional Office required and received copies of SMP's SBA
Form 355, Application for Small Business Determination, and SBA
Form 1340, Size Determination Affiliation Supplement, as well as
its response to Modoc's and Ochoco's allegations. In its
determination issued on May 5, 1993, it found SMP to be
controlled by Graves and to be affiliated with Graves, the
Graves Family Trust, Snow Mountain Pine Investment, Inc. and the
latter's principal owner, Anglo Arabic Investment Corporation.
It declined to find affiliation with SMP Corp/WLF or with other
members of the Walsh group of companies. It rejected allegations
that the financial consulting agreement with Sequoia constitutes
assistance, or that the newly organized concern applies to a
change in general partners, and noted both that the 85 percent
requirement for removing the general partner insulates Graves
(and SMP) from control by the Walsh group and that, based on
review of the "list of SMP investors listing their units held
for each category of investment in SMP along with their
percentage voting share for votes of the partnership," it "does
not appear that the Walsh/Ferris group are the principal
beneficiaries" of the limited partnership. The Regional Office
explained in its determination that "[b]ecause of the above
findings, the SBA did not ask for further information on all
limited partners or investigate the full extent of the holdings
of each limited partner tin other firms]."

Ochoco's appeal of this determination on June 9, 1993, contends
that the Regional Office simply affirmed its February 25th
recertification, in which proceeding third parties who might
have offered countervailing evidence were barred from
participating by the regulations, rather than instituting a new
investigation responsive to the protest allegations. Ochoco
further contends that the Regional Office failed to examine the
"totality of the circumstances" or to consider the "practical
realities of business life" when evaluating the connections
between the Graves management group and SMP Corp/WLF and the
Walsh group. It points out that the new general partner "is
still under the day-to-day management of the same individuals, n
who "occupy their positions at the will of the former general
partner," and that the Graves management group has an identity
of interests with the Walsh group. In support, Ochoco points to
the "longstanding relationship among the president of the
current general partner [Donald Graves], the management of Snow
Mountain [Graves, Brown, Huntley, Maple and Olmstead] and the
owners of the former general partner [SMP Corp - Walsh, Ferris
and Lillie];" to the fact that replacement of SMP Corp as the
general partner and amendment of the limited partnership
agreement, ostensibly to divest the Walsh group of any power to
control SMP, required the cooperation and approval of SMP Corp
and the Walsh group; to the fact that Sequoia continues to
provide financial advice to SMP; and to the fact that the Graves
group has also replaced Ferris, Walsh, Lillie and Leach as
directors of Snow Mountain Investment, Inc., which owns 13.9
percent of SMP's voting power.

As a separate, but correlative argument, Ochoco contends that
any power on the part of the Graves group to forestall Graves'
removal as the general partner, should relations between the
Graves and the Walsh groups turn acrimonious, is an illusion
and, by extension of its allegations of cooperation between the
two groups, an intentional one designed to suggest a shift in power
and control where none has occurred. In this regard, Ochoco
argues that the Graves management group does not possess the
requisite percentage of voting power needed to defeat an action
to remove Graves as SMP's general partner because the December
31, 1992 amended limited partnership agreement bars the general
partner from voting on this issue and, as its owner and alter
ego, the Graves Family Trust i8 thus prohibited by the terms of
the agreement and the implications of California law from
exercising its 9.1 percent voting power, leaving the Graves
management group with only 8 percent. 4/

Ochoco also points to continuing financial ties between SMP
Corp/WLF and SMP as evidence of their continuing affiliation.
Specifically, Ochoco alleges that, as SMP's general partner
during the formative years in which its major debt was
contracted, SMP Corp remains liable on these debts and is "the
one to whom the bank will look" in the event of any default. It
argues that SMP Corp/WLF "essentially guarantees Snow Mountain's
current financial obligations," in consequence, and that this
reliance on its former general partner's "financial
wherewithal," coupled with Sequoia's consulting agreement under
which "[k]ey principals of the former general partner continue
to act as the representatives of Snow Mountain in Snow
Mountain's banking and lending relationships," creates
affiliation under SBA's regulations between SMP and SMP Corp/WLF
and the Walsh group.

These financial ties also constitute that "financial assistance"
necessary to Ochoco's argument that SMP is affiliated with the
Walsh group under the newly organized concern rule. Pointing out
that Graves was organized in January, 1993, and is owned by SMP
Corp's former president, that its remaining principals, Brown,
Maple, Olmstead and Huntley are former officers of SMP Corp, and
that both SMP Corp/WLF and Graves are in the business of
"running a forest products company," Ochoco claims that all
criteria of the newly organized concern rule have been met and
that the absence of a "clear line of fracture" between SMP Corp
and Graves bespeaks affiliation between SMP and the Walsh group
whether Graves or SMP is denominated the "new" concern.
SMP responded to Ochoco's appeal on June 25, 1993 with the
following abbreviated 5/ explanation of SMP's history as it
illuminates the changing relationship between management and the
Walsh group:

     Donald A. Graves, now the president of Snow Mountain, first
     focused his attention on what is now Snow Mountain's
     sawmill in Hines, Oregon, as the result of a letter
     disseminated by Price Waterhouse, which stated that a
     client had a lumber manufacturing facility for sale.
     Graves' interest in the mill arose from his 34 years of
     experience in the timber and sawmill business, beginning as
     a financial officer for small companies in the late 1950's
     and climaxing as a senior executive of Southwest Forest
     Industries, Inc. in the 1980's. Southwest was sold in 1987
     to Stone Container Corp. Graves left Stone in January 1988.
     
     After considering financing with two interested banks,
     Graves ultimately was introduced to William D. Walsh,
     Robert A. Ferris, John M. Lillie and J. Frank Leach of
     Menlo Park, California, whose Sequoia Associates
     ("Sequoia") helped Graves assemble a limited partnership to
     purchase the mill. (For ease of reference, Walsh, Ferris,
     Lillie, Leach, Sequoia Associates, and Snow Mountain Pine
     Corp., the former general partner of Snow Mountain and now
     named WLF Investment Corp., may sometimes collectively be
     called "the Walsh/Ferris group".)
     
     The purchase of the Hines operation by the limited
     partnership, Snow Mountain Pine of Oregon, Ltd., 6/ was
     announced in early December, 1989. Over time, Graves
     recruited Marshall C. Brown, Travis A. Huntley,

     John B. Maple and Scott D. Olmstead, to join him in running
     Snow Mountain. None had any prior knowledge of or contact
     with the Walsh/Ferris group. All were in the forest
     products business and had previously been employed by
     Graves, either directly or indirectly, in Southwest Forest
     Industries, Inc. or Stone Container Corp., with the
     exception of Maple, who had worked for Southwest Forest
     Industries, Inc., but had not been employed by Graves.
     [Footnote added.]
     
     The original sole general partner of Snow Mountain Pine of
     Oregon Ltd. was Snow Mountain Pine Corp., owned by Ferris,
     Walsh and Lillie. Graves was a limited partner, and served
     as president of Snow Mountain Pine of Oregon Ltd. and as
     president of Snow Mountain Pine Corp. The SBA determined on
     June 15, 1990, that Snow Mountain was a small business
     concern under this structure. 7/ [Footnote added.]
     
     By mid-1992, Snow Mountain began planning a change in
     general partner. The owners of the general partner had
     fulfilled their role in helping Snow Mountain through its
     formative phase, did not wish any longer to have any
     control, and wished to pursue other interests.
     
     In December, 1992, as this change was nearly ready to take
     place, Ochoco protested Snow Mountain's size status in
     connection with a timber sale. Because the change was about
     to occur and the protest decision would thus affect only
     one timber sale, Snow Mountain did not contest the protest.
     
     The change in general partner took place even before the
     formality of the protest decision. Size Determination
     Memorandum, Case No. 10-SD-93-010 (January 11, 1993). The
     change in general partner and amendment of the Snow
     Mountain limited partnership agreement put into the hands
     of Snow Mountain's five managers (Graves and his family,
     Brown, Huntley, Maple and Olmstead) both full control of
     Snow Mountain and the ability to defeat any vote to remove
     Graves Corp. as the sole general partner.
     
     Snow Mountain Pine Corp. became a limited partner under the
     new name of WLF Investment Corp. ("WLF")
     
SMP argues that Ochoco's appeal is based on its mistaken
impression that members of the Walsh group, rather than Donald
Graves, initiated the "Snow Mountain deal and therefore must
still be pulling the strings of their puppets from behind the
scenes." SMP has submitted signed, sworn statements from
Huntley, Brown, Maple and Olmstead supporting SMP's statement
that they each were recruited by Donald Graves, had had no prior
acquaintance with any members of the Walsh group, and received a
limited partnership share upon commencing employment with SMP.

SMP had earlier submitted to the Regional Office the April, 1993
signed, sworn statements of Walsh, Lillie, Leach and Ferris
stating, inter alia, with respect to each, that he "does not
exercise, and has no power to exercise, either positive or
negative control over Snow Mountain Pine Ltd., or the general
partner of Snow Mountain Pine Ltd.," 8/ and contends on appeal
that such statements must prevail over Ochoco's "theories,
opinions and misstatements" to the contrary, under 13 CFR
121.1606(e) governing the weight to be accorded "specific signed
factual evidence." SMP argues that attributing control to
individuals who provided initial "investment assistance and
start-up management help" for as long as they retain an
investment in the company would discourage such investment
strategies and would be productive of "bad public policy."

SMP contends that Size Appeal of Allen & Hoshall, supra, cited
by Ochoco, is the exception which proves the general rule that
the general partner controls a limited partnership. It notes
that the contrary finding in Hoshall was based on one limited
partner's receipt of 95 percent of the firm's profits, as well
as other factors also not present in this case. SMP supports its
argument that Graves has absolute control of SMP as its general
partner and that the Walsh group has been effectively prevented
from reasserting day-to-day control, by citing the requirement
that an action to oust Graves be supported by 85 percent of
SMP's voting shares and has submitted an opinion of counsel that
the alter ego theory is inapplicable here and that the Graves
Trust, as a limited partner owning the general partner, would
nevertheless be able to vote under the terms of the limited
partnership agreement in an action to remove Graves as SMP's
general partner. SMP argues that no identity of interest exists
between the Graves and the Walsh groups which would either
defeat the element of control secured by the 85 percent requirement
or otherwise create affiliation between SMP and those companies
controlled by the Walsh group. It argues that the existence of
common investments, not mere cooperation, is the predicate for
finding an identity of interest and notes that the Walsh and the
Graves groups have no common investments other than in SMP and
thus no identity of interest that would require aggregation of
their voting shares in this regard or inclusion of other firms
as affiliates of SMP.

SMP also contends that the newly organized concern rule is
inapplicable to SMP's change in general partners and that, even
were it relevant, "operating a sawmill and investing in one" are
not the same and do not meet the "field of operations"
criterion. It argues further that Sequoia's financial consulting
agreement alone is insufficient for a finding of "assistance,"
which has only been determined to exist where more than one type
of assistance is involved, and that it "is short-term, it is for
a small amount of money paid by Snow Mountain, it provides no
financing to Snow Mountain, and it calls for no services that
are not available from any number of sources." SMP adds that "it
most certainly does not make any 'financial wherewithal' of
Sequoia available to back Snow Mountain in obtaining financing."
SMP rejects Ochoco's allegation "that Snow Mountain Corp./WLF
remains the entity that essentially guarantees Snow Mountain's
current financial obligations, including its bank obligation,"
explaining that

     Snow Mountain's banking obligations are pursuant to an
     agreement of December 7, 1989, with its banker that
     continues in effect. That agreement defines "partner" as
     "the General Partner and any Limited Partner." It further
     provides:
     
          "Non-Recourse to Partners. Lender agrees that, unless
          such Partner shall otherwise consent in writing that
          it is an obligor, no Partner shall be personally
          liable for the Liabilities, and Lender shall look only
          to borrowers, and the assets and income of Borrowers,
          for payment of the Liabilities.
     
     No general or limited partner of Snow Mountain has provided
     such consent. Thus, the bank could not look to the former
     general partner, or any other partners.... In fact, other
     than an equipment lease, Snow Mountain has no significant
     financing other than under the 1989 agreement with its
     bank.
     
On July 6, 1993, Ochoco filed a response to several issues
discussed by SMP. It points out that affidavits filed by members
of the Walsh group disclaiming control of SMP are self-serving
and "conclusionary" in nature and do not constitute "factual
evidence" within the ambit of S121-1606(e). It continues to
allege substantial deficiencies in the Regional Office's
investigation of the financial ties between SMP and SMP Corp,
noting that it could not have examined or even considered the
December 7, 1989 banking agreement referenced in SMP's response.

Ochoco disagrees that an identity of interests requires common
investments, citing Size Appeal of The Emmes Corporation, No.
3730 (1993), in which certain employees were found to have an
identity of interests with their employer, and rejects SMP's
distinction between itself and the challenged firm in Hoshall as
follows:

     Snow Mountain contends that "there are more than 30 limited
     partners with none dominant.... N Snow Mountain's response
     at 8. Snow Mountain can only make this claim if it does not
     aggregate those of the limited partners that have a clear
     identity of interest such as WLF and the trusts controlled
     by its principals. Aggregating only the voting share
     interests of WLF and the Erickson, Ferris, Leach, Lillie,
     and the Walsh Family Trusts reveals a 32% interest held by
     this affiliated group.... 9/ This constitutes the largest
     single block of voting interests in Snow Mountain. If the
     interests of Graves Corp., Graves Family Trust, Snow
     Mountain Investment, and Messrs. Huntley, Olmstead, Maple
     and Brown are added to the mix, the total voting interest
     of this entire affiliated block is 64%.  [Footnote added.]

On July 12, 1993, SMP opposed the submission of this response
because it was filed, without a showing of good cause, after the
deadline set forth in the notice of appeal for the submission of
information and because the arguments made "add nothing" to the
record. The response has, nevertheless, been admitted and
reviewed in the interests of developing a full and complete
record in this matter.

Discussion

The general partner has traditionally been considered to control
a limited partnership for purposes of assessing affiliation and
consequent size status. See Size Appeal of Interactive
Resources. Inc., No. 3168 (1989). Those circumstances in which
it has been found otherwise have been rare and have involved
scenarios in which the connections between the limited partner
and general partners have been so extensive as to admit no
distinctions between them with respect to control of the limited
partnership. Thus we held in Size Appeal of Allen and Hoshall.
Ltd., No. 3637 (1992) that the limited partner owning 95 percent
of the limited partnership shares (and receiving 95 percent of
the profits, in consequence) controlled the protested concern,
which obtained services from and had a mutual loan agreement
with the limited partner and three of whose general partners
owned shares in the limited partner and were on its board of
directors.

We are asked here to determine whether SMP is another such
exception, and the decision has not been an easy one. Certain of
Ochoco's allegations are valid: concerning SMP's alleged
identity of interests among members of the Graves management
group, there is no agreement binding them to vote as a unit and
no common investments in other concerns that would invoke the
presumption of concerted action and consequent control embodied
in the identity of interests rule. 10/ The amended limited
partnership agreement appears to disallow that ownership of
shares in the limited partnership and attendant voting power in
the hands of management (other than the Graves Corporation itself)
that is essential to SMP's claim that Graves cannot be removed as the
general partner because management controls 17.1 percent of the
voting power and that its control of SMP is thus "absolute." 11/
The newly organized concern rule is not barred per se from use
where, as here, the shift in control is between a concern's
former and its new general partner. SMP is newly organized in a
sense consonant with our previous constructions of the rule. 12/
All other criteria organization of Graves by officers of SMP
Corp, similar fields of operation, 13/ and assistance - are
present, although evidence of the latter is less than compelling
in its implications.

Yet we are left with the fact that both bases for rejecting the
general partner as the entity in control of SMP rely on
regulations articulated, in essence, as presumptions 14/ and
that to apply them to the circumstances in this case would be
unreasonable and would ignore SMP's history and origins and the
valid reasons, independent of issues relating to its size
status, that led to its restructuring. We find SMP's
explanations in this regard to be credible and to be consistent
with the affidavit testimony and documentation produced:
specifically, the extensive technical expertise of the Graves
management group, affidavits from Huntley, olmstead, Maple and
Brown concerning their recruitment by Graves, 15/ the fact that
members of the Graves management group are involved in no other
businesses, particularly none also involving the Walsh group, and the
realities of small business financing, which frequently require
investment strategies like that encountered in this case.

Thus, actions such as SMP Corp's relinquishment of control as
SMP's general partner seem less the products of circumvention
than the natural evolution of a growing small business concern.
In consequence, what we see here is not an identity of interests
among members of the Graves and Walsh groups, inferred from
their long-standing relationship and from their cooperation in
effecting SMP's restructuring, but the withdrawal from control
of those who have invested in a concern and retained control of
it until the technical personnel have established their capacity
to continue operating the business effectively and thereby
protect that investment. There is evidence that management has
17.1 percent of the voting power, and it may reasonably be
inferred that the members of management will vote as a unit to
preserve their control over SMP. This group's cohesion and
mutuality of professional interests have been evident from SMP's
inception and constitute that "concert of purpose and efforts"
which we recognized in Size Appeal of The Emmes Corporation, No.
3730 (1993) as creating an identity of interests among employees
engaged in certain tasks on behalf of themselves as well as
their employer. Under the circumstances, it is less reasonable
to assume that consensus will be found among limited partners
holding the remaining voting shares necessary to comply with the
85 percent ouster requirement, without which Graves would remain
the general partner in control of SMP.

This 85 percent requirement is a signal barrier to denying
control by the general partner. We have certainly found such
control to lie with the general partner under circumstances
manifesting far less control over removal than exists here. In
so holding, we reject Ochoco's contention that the Graves Family
Trust, as owner of the General Partner, is barred from voting on
the ouster issue. Although paragraph 14.1 of the amended limited
partnership agreement provides for Graves' ouster by a vote of
"the outstanding Class A and Class B Units held by persons other
than the General Partner," the term "General Partner" is
narrowly and precisely defined in paragraph 1.12 as the "Graves
Corporation." Thus we find no bar in the agreement to a limited
partner who is also the owner of the general partner voting on
the question of ouster. 16/

Of course the problem, in this case, is that those who formerly
controlled SMP have retired from management but remain in
possession of approximately one third of SMP's investment units.
So SMP poses the question: Need these parties have divested
themselves of these interests upon abdicating control? And, if
so, is such a requirement by judicial fiat fair? Or is it
prudent public policy? We think not. The beneficial interests
that members of the Walsh group continue to hold in SMP are not
excessive: approximately 33 percent of the voting shares and of
the investment units. While the Graves group's investments
constitute only 8 percent of the total investment in SMP, this
is not dispositive in the case of a limited partnership. The
power to control SMP derives from Graves' management role as its
general partner, not from the Graves group's investment interest
in the concern. 17/

Nor is the fact that, as SMP's former general partner, SMP Corp
remains liable for actions taken by SMP during its tenure 18/ or
that Sequoia presently has a one-year consulting agreement,
sufficient to convert the presumption in the newly organized
concern rule into a finding of affiliation between SMP and those
formerly in control: SMP Corp and the Walsh group. SMP is
correct in its assertion that more than one type of assistance
is required in order to comply with the requirements of the
newly organized concern rule. Here we have more than one, but
only the consulting agreement constitutes assistance in the
conventional sense. Unlike those liabilities arising under its
banking agreement, SMP does not deny that liability may attach
to SMP Corp by virtue of extant equipment leases. Nevertheless,
this form of alleged assistance, like the capital infusion from
the limited partners at SMP's inception, represents an unusual
construction of the term "assistance" in the regulation. While
we do not hold that such interrelationships could not be found
to create affiliation in future cases, we find that their
existence in this case is not determinative of affiliation under
the newly organized concern rule. To find otherwise, would
elevate form over substance with no practical consequence, since
we could and would still exercise that discretion inherent in
the term "generally," i.e. "[a]ffiliation generally arises," and
decline to make a finding of affiliation on this basis.

Although the Regional Office erred in determining that the newly
organized concern rule cannot be applied to the facts presented
here, our analysis, upon its application, produces no different
ultimate result from that reached by the Regional Office. SMP is
affiliated only with Snow Mountain Investment, Inc. In the
absence of affiliation with SMP Corp/WLF and the Walsh group,
there needs be no further inquiry at this time concerning the
latter's affiliations with other concerns. 19/

We hasten to add that, while present circumstances do not
suggest affiliation, certain future actions, such as further
recourse to assistance from the Walsh group, might well manifest
a renewed identity of interests or other basis for a finding of
affiliation that would dictate a different result. In their
absence, however, the Regional Office determination that SMP is
not affiliated with SMP Corp/WLF and the Walsh group and that it
is small under the 500-employee size standard is affirmed.

Conclusion

The Regional Office determination that SMP is small under the
500-employee size standard is AFFIRMED; the appeal is DENIED.
This constitutes the final decision of the Small Business
Administration. See 13 CFR 121.1720.




                         ___________________________________
                         Jane E. Phillips (Presiding)
                         Administrative Judge
                         
                         
                         ____________________________________
                         Michael S. Cole (Concurring)
                         Administrative Judge
                         

                         ____________________________________
                         Elwin H. White (Concurring)
                         Administrative Judge

_______________

     1/ Ochoco certifies that it received the determination on
May 10,1993.  Although the appeal was not filed within the five-
working-day period and thus does not apply to the instant timber
sale, it was filed no later than 30 days following receipt of the
determination appealed and thus applies to future timber sales.
13 CFR 121.1705(a)(1).
     2/ The recertification procedures set forth at 13 CFR
121.1607 admit of no third party challenges to an application,
and none was submitted.
     3/ Ochoco notes that SMP's voting power is not
representative of the benefits accruing to the various limited
partners. Voting power is confined to the class A and B units,
which constitute less than ten percent of SMP's partnership
units. Ochoco points out that the actual value of the class A
and B units is "substantially less than 10 percent of the value
of/all of the partnership units, H which is based upon the
amounts of capital invested and consequent guaranteed rates
of return.

4/ Paragraph 14.1 of the amended limited partnership agreement
provides as follows:

     A general partner may be removed from the partnership only
     upon the vote of Limited Partners holding 85 percent of the
     outstanding Class A and B Units held by persons other than
     the General Partner.

Paragraph 1.12 defines the term "General Partner" as "Graves
Corporation, an Oregon corporation, or any person or entity
succeeding any such person or entity as a General Partner."
     5/ SMP proffered a somewhat longer explanation to the
Regional Office in response to the protests filed by Modoc and
Ochoco.
     6/ SMP's name was changed to Snow Mountain Pine, Ltd. in
1992.
     7/ SMP fails to mention, however, that SMP was found in
that determination to be affiliated with SMP Corp.
     8/ Each affiant also attested to the fact that he is
neither a principal nor an employee nor has any other interest
in Snow Mountain Investment, Inc., or its principal owner, Anglo
Arabic Investment Corporation.
     9/ In a parenthetical, Ochoco notes that it
has not been provided with the complete investor record which
shows the amounts of the individual limited partners' total
investment in Snow Mountain but only with the last column which
shows the percentage of voting shares. Ochoco assumes that the
total investment held by these limited partners results in a
similar percentage of total ownership.
     10/ The rule, located at 13 CFR 121.401(d), provides as
follows:

     Identity of interest between and among persons as an
     affiliation determinant. Affiliation can arise between or
     among two or more persons with an identity of interest,
     such as members of the same family or persons with common
     investments in more than one concern. In determining who
     controls or has the power to control a concern, persons
     with an identity of interest may be treated as though they
     were one person

     11/ Paragraph 5.1 of the amended limited partnership
agreement states that n [p]urchasers of units, other than the
General Partner, shall become 'Limited Partners.' n Paragraph
12.1 states, with an exception not relevant here, that "Limited
Partners shall take no part in the control, conduct or operation
of the [limited] partnership, and shall have no right...to
control or influence The General Partner.... H
     12/ See, Size Appeal of I.T.E. Contractors and Rental.
Inc., No. 1922 (1984) in which we held that a change in the
"official corporate name to reflect an entirely new line of
business just prior to bidding" qualified the protested concern
as "newly organized" within the meaning of the rule.
     13/ The distinction drawn by SMP between running a lumber
mill and investing in one, where the firm has managed the mill
as its general partner, is not a viable one.
     14/ We have said as much in Size Appeal of Golden Bear
Arborists. Inc., No. 1899 (1984) regarding the identity of
interests rule.
     15/ We contrast these with the conclusory affidavits
submitted by Walsh, Ferris and Lillie which do not constitute
"factual evidence" under S121-1606(e).
     16/ A more troubling aspect of the agreement is the bar in
paragraph 12.1 to a limited partner's [taking part in the
control...of the [limited] partnership" or of "the General
Partner." However, we find that this provision, which attempts
to preserve the limited liability regarding third parties that
is reserved to limited partners as a matter of law has no
applicability in this case to questions concerning its internal
operations and affiliation under Part 121.
     17/ The finding in Size Appeal of Allen and Hoshall, supra,
depended not only on the limited partner's 95 percent
"beneficial interest" in the limited partnership but, more
importantly, on the general partners' connections with the
limited partner. Thus, even were we to adopt Ochoco's suggestion
and aggregate additional investment units with those claimed by
the Walsh group, no control would necessarily follow. The
concept of control based on percentages of shares owned in a
company is a feature of corporate law, and Hoshall should not be
read to have obscured this distinction between corporations and
limited partnerships.
     18/ We distinguish these liabilities from the banking
obligations which we are persuaded are subject to the
nonrecourse provisions of SMP's banking agreement and thus do
not presently accrue to SMP Corp.
     19/ Examination of the Regional Office record reveals, in
answer to Ochoco's arguments concerning the adequacy of the
investigation, that the Regional Office did not merely rely on
information submitted during the recertification process in
rendering the determination appealed here but required SMP to
file new SBA Forms 355 and 1340 as well as to respond to the
allegations raised in Modoc's and Ochoco's protests. Upon
receiving only a partial listing of SMP's limited partners on
the Form 355, the Regional Office further required SMP to supply
the full list as well as the numbers of voting shares and
investment units held by each person or entity listed.

