Title: Cross-disciplinary Research at Undergraduate Institutions (C-RUI)
Date: 12/24/03
Replaced: NSF 03-514





Cross-disciplinary Research at Undergraduate Institutions (C-RUI)


Program Solicitation 
NSF 04-536
Replaces Document NSF 03-514

NSF Logo

National Science Foundation
Directorate for Biological Sciences
      Division of Biological Infrastructure



Full Proposal Deadline(s) (due by 5 p.m. proposer's local time):

      June 15, 2004


REVISIONS AND UPDATES

This Program Solicitation replaces NSF 03-514  Three significant
changes have been made in this solicitation: (1) To reflect the unique
cross-disciplinary nature of this program, the name has been changed
from Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions to
Cross-disciplinary Research at Undergraduate Institutions, using the
same acronym (C-RUI).  (2) The deadline for submission has been changed
from January 10, 2004, to June 15, 2004.  Awards will be made in late
Fall 2004.  (3) An alphabetized list of conflicts of interest is now
required in the Special Information and Supplementary Documentation section.

Proposals submitted in anticipation of the January 10, 2004, deadline
may be withdrawn and resubmitted by June 15, 2004, after modifications
are made to conform to this new solicitation. 


SUMMARY OF PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS


General Information

Program Title:

    Cross-disciplinary Research at Undergraduate Institutions (C-RUI)
    Formerly called Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions

Synopsis of Program:

    The goal of the Cross-disciplinary Research at Undergraduate
    Institutions (C-RUI) is to support research efforts involving
    faculty from different fields and undergraduate students at
    predominantly undergraduate institutions. This program is
    specifically targeted toward cross-disciplinary research projects
    that require contributions from more than one disciplinary area.
    C-RUI is also intended to facilitate greater diversity in student
    participation and to contribute to the development of the next
    generation of scientists well-trained in 21st century biology.

Cognizant Program Officer(s):

    * Sally E. O'Connor, Program Director, Directorate for Biological
      Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, 615 N, telephone:
      (703) 292-8470, email: soconnor@nsf.gov 

Applicable Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number(s):

    * 47.074 --- Biological Sciences


Eligibility Information

    * Organization Limit:

      Only predominantly undergraduate institutions as defined in the
      Research at Undergraduate Institutions program announcement, NSF
      00-144, are eligible to submit proposals. Minority-serving
      institutions and two year colleges are especially encouraged to
      apply. Eligible institutions may partner with non-RUI academic
      institutions and not-for-profit research institutions, provided
      that a majority of the key personnel and all undergraduate
      students to be involved are from RUI institutions. 

    * PI Eligibility Limit:

      The PI must come from an eligible academic department. 
      Eligibility is defined as follows: (1) the department must offer
      courses that qualify for degree credit in NSF-supportable fields,
      and (2) the department must not offer doctorate programs. 
      However, co-PIs may come from departments that offer Ph.D. programs.

    * Limit on Number of Proposals: None Specified.


Award Information

    * Anticipated Type of Award: Standard or Continuing Grant
    * Estimated Number of Awards: 8 - Up to 8 awards, contingent upon
      the quality of proposals received and availability of funds
    * Anticipated Funding Amount: $2,000,000 - Approximately $2 million
      for new awards in FY 2005, subject to availability of funds


Proposal Preparation and Submission Instructions

          A. Proposal Preparation Instructions

    * Full Proposal Preparation Instructions: This solicitation contains
      information that deviates from the standard Grant Proposal Guide
      (GPG) proposal preparation guidelines. Please see the full text of
      this solicitation for further information.

          B. Budgetary Information

    * Cost Sharing Requirements: Cost Sharing is not required.
    * Indirect Cost (F&A) Limitations: Not Applicable.
    * Other Budgetary Limitations: Not Applicable.

          C. Due Dates

    * Full Proposal Deadline Date(s) (due by 5 p.m. proposer's local time):
            June 15, 2004


Proposal Review Information

    * Merit Review Criteria: National Science Board approved criteria
      apply.

Award Administration Information

    * Award Conditions: Standard NSF award conditions apply.
    * Reporting Requirements: Standard NSF reporting requirements apply.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Summary of Program Requirements <#summary>

 I. Introduction

 II. Program Description

III. Eligibility Information

 IV. Award Information

  V. Proposal Preparation and Submission Instructions
       A. Proposal Preparation Instructions
       B. Budgetary Information
       C. Due Dates
       D. FastLane Requirements

 VI. Proposal Review Information
       A. NSF Proposal Review Process
       B. Review Protocol and Associated Customer Service Standard

VII. Award Administration Information
       A. Notification of the Award
       B. Award Conditions
       C. Reporting Requirements

VIII.Contacts for Additional Information

 IX. Other Programs of Interest


I. INTRODUCTION

The National Science Foundation (NSF) is charged with ensuring the
vitality of the nation's scientific and technological enterprise.
Integration of research and education is one of NSF's core strategies
designed to build a strong resource base for the nation's research and
education programs in all areas of science and engineering. In order to
help assure a broad base for this endeavor, NSF encourages research by
faculty at predominantly undergraduate institutions, including two year
colleges. One specific example of this activity is the NSF-wide Research
in Undergraduate Institution (RUI) program. The RUI program
announcement, NSF 00-144, can be found at
http://www.nsf.gov/cgi-bin/getpub?nsf00144. Section II.B. of the RUI
Program Announcement refers to "Collaborative Faculty Research Projects"
and directs potential applicants to the appropriate NSF Directorate for
further instruction. It is the intention of the Directorate for
Biological Sciences (BIO) to participate in this activity by continuing
the Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions (C-RUI)
activity that began in Fiscal Year 1995, and now renamed
Cross-disciplianary Research at Undergraduate Institutions.

Increasingly, advances in research in the biological sciences depend on
skills and knowledge that extend beyond traditional disciplinary
boundaries because 21st century biology is multidimensional,
multidisciplinary and integrative. In order to advance biology in the
21st century, a new way to provide research experiences for scientists
at all levels is needed. Especially acute is a need for
multidisciplinary research experiences at the undergraduate level. C-RUI
is an attempt to meet this identified need.


II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

A. Program Goals

The goal of C-RUI is to support collaborative, multidisciplinary
research efforts at predominantly undergraduate institutions, involving
faculty and undergraduate students at these institutions. This program
is specifically targeted toward cross-disciplinary research projects
that require contributions from more than one disciplinary area (e.g.,
biology and geoscience, biology and chemistry, biology and mathematics,
biology and computer science, etc.). C-RUI is intended to catalyze a
cultural change in undergraduate research and education -- for students,
faculty and institutions -- by establishing innovative models for
collaboration that transcend traditional disciplinary boundaries. It is
also intended to facilitate greater diversity in student participation
and to contribute to the development of the next generation of
well-trained scientists.

B. Program Features of C-RUI

The proposed cross-disciplinary research plan must focus on a research
problem in the biological sciences that is best approached from broad
multidisciplinary perspectives. A cross-disciplinary research group must
consist of three or more faculty and up to ten undergraduates from the
predominantly undergraduate institution(s). C-RUI research projects may
be carried out entirely within the predominantly undergraduate
institution(s), or may be collaborative projects with institutions other
than predominantly undergraduate institutions. In the latter case, a
majority of key personnel (PIs and co-PIs) and all the students involved
must be from the predominantly undergraduate institution.

The research project is expected to have a research theme focused on
questions in the biological sciences, employing approaches that are
explicitly cross-disciplinary in nature. The collaborative
cross-disciplinary research project should take advantage of the
strengths and expertise available at the applicant's institution,
resulting in a strong research activity whose scientific merit is
clearly enhanced by the collaboration. If appropriate, the applicant may
form a partnership with institutions such as universities, museums,
field stations, and marine laboratories that can bring resources not
available at the applicant's institution. All students involved in the
program must come from predominantly undergraduate institutions and the
majority of the research and education activities must be conducted at
the predominantly undergraduate institution. In order to foster
multidisciplinary training and education, students are expected to have
a minimum of 2 mentors and be exposed to all aspects of the project.

The program will provide support for:

    * Faculty at predominantly undergraduate institutions to develop
      multidisciplinary research programs that enhance their research
      capabilities and promote undergraduate training through quality
      hands-on research experiences.

    * Development of new research-based education and training
      activities integrated in the proposed multidisciplinary research.
      Examples would include, but are not limited to, a newly developed
      course or course module based on the proposed research project,
      revision of an existing course that highlights concepts and
      techniques in multidisciplinary areas of research, or enhancement
      of academic programs to attract students in multidisciplinary
      academic tracks.

      Equipment necessary to conduct the proposed research (up to
      $50,000 in the first year only) and education activities at the
      predominantly undergraduate institution. The equipment must be
      well justified and a vendor quote may be attached with the
      application.

    *Participation of two-year colleges and minority-serving
      institutions through partnerships with research-intensive
      institutions, provided that the submitting institution is
      RUI-eligible and that primary research activities are performed at
      the RUI institution.

Please note that the Directorate for Biological Sciences does not
provide support for bioscience research with disease related goals,
including work on the etiology, diagnosis and treatment of physical and
mental disease, abnormality or malfunction in human beings or animals.
Animal models of such conditions and the development and testing of
drugs and other procedures for their treatment also are not eligible for
support.


III. ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION

Eligibility to submit a C-RUI proposal consists of institutional and
departmental criteria, both of which must be met. A representative of
the institution submitting a C-RUI proposal signs a Certification of RUI
Eligibility included in the Supplementary Documentation section of the
proposal.

   1.Eligible "predominantly undergraduate" institutions include U.S.
      two-year, four-year, masters-level, and small doctoral colleges
      and universities. Eligible institutions (1) grant baccalaureate
      degrees in NSF-supported fields, or provide programs of
      instruction for students pursuing such degrees with institutional
      transfers (e.g., two-year schools); (2) have undergraduate
      enrollment exceeding graduate enrollment; and (3) award no more
      than an average of 10 Ph.D. and/or D.Sc. degrees per year in all
      disciplines that NSF supports, averaged over 2 to 5 years
      preceding proposal submission. Proposals involving more than one
      academic institution are acceptable; however, the applicant
      institution must be a predominantly undergraduate institution and
      must have overall management responsibility. For proposals
      involving collaborations between predominantly undergraduate
      institutions and other institutions, most of the research must be
      conducted at the predominantly undergraduate institution.

   2.Eligible departments (principal investigators) (1) must offer
      courses that qualify for bachelor's degree credit in
      NSF-supportable fields and (2) may not offer a doctorate program
      in the department of the designated PI. The co-PIs may be in
      departments that offer Ph.D. programs.

      The principal investigator for a C-RUI proposal must be employed
      by, or have a commitment to be employed by, an eligible home
      institution (i.e., a predominantly undergraduate institution) at
      the time the proposal is submitted. In addition, the principal
      investigator must be from an eligible (i.e., non-doctoral)
      department. Co-principal investigators may be from other
      institutions or from doctoral departments.

      Duplicate submission of the same proposal to another NSF program
      is not permitted. However, an investigator may submit a different
      proposal for support of another project while a proposal is
      pending. The Directorate for Biological Sciences will not accept
      proposals that are duplicates of proposals being submitted to
      another Federal agency for simultaneous consideration, except for
      proposals from beginning investigators (never had an NSF research
      grant before). The Grant Proposal Guide should be consulted for
      definitions and exceptions to this rule and for limitations on the
      kinds of research that NSF supports. See "General" on page 1 of
      the GPG.


IV. AWARD INFORMATION

Approximately $2 million is available for new awards in FY 2005, subject
to availability of funds.


V. PROPOSAL PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION INSTRUCTIONS


A. Proposal Preparation Instructions

Full Proposal Instructions:

Proposals submitted in response to this program
announcement/solicitation should be prepared and submitted in accordance
with the general guidelines contained in the NSF Grant Proposal Guide
(GPG). The complete text of the GPG is available electronically on the
NSF Website at: http://www.nsf.gov/cgi-bin/getpub?gpg. Paper copies of
the GPG may be obtained from the NSF Publications Clearinghouse,
telephone (301) 947-2722 or by e-mail from pubs@nsf.gov

NOTE: C-RUI proposals differ from other proposals primarily in that they
must contain (1) Certification of RUI Eligibility, and (2) a separate
RUI Impact Statement. The NSF FastLane system should be used for
submission of all proposals under the C-RUI activity.

Cover Sheet. So that your proposal is properly identified and directed,
please follow these instructions for NSF Form 1207, "Cover Sheet for
Proposal to the National Science Foundation." From the pull down menu
for the program announcement/solicitation block, select the number for
this C-RUI announcement. From the ensuing screen, select the Division
(DBI) and Program (C-RUI) to which the proposal should be directed.
Include the acronym "C-RUI" in the title of the proposal entered on the
Cover Sheet, e.g. "C-RUI: Metabolic Cycles in Arctic Ruminants."

Project Summary (1-page limit). Provide a brief (300 words or less)
description of the research program. At the top of this page include the
title of the project, the name of the PI and the lead institution, list
of co-PIs and other key participants with their institutions. This
summary should be intelligible to a general audience. Be sure to include
both the intellectual merit and anticipated broader impacts. If the
scientific objectives and anticipated broader impacts are not addressed,
the proposal will be returned without review (See GPG).

Project Description (maximum 15 pages). Proposers should pay particular
attention to the Project Description, which is the principal part of the
proposal. It is a detailed statement of the work to be undertaken and
should include:

    * Objectives for the work and its expected significance; relation to
      the present state of knowledge and to work in progress in the
      field; description of the general plan of the work, including
      experimental methods and analysis and, if appropriate, plans for
      archival materials or data-sharing. This description must contain
      sufficient detail to allow the reviewers to assess the scientific
      merit of the project.

    * The biological question being investigated and a description of
      the expected contribution of each team member to the proposed
      research project. Collaborative proposals are expected to include
      (1) a strong research activity whose scientific merit is clearly
      enhanced by development of the collaboration, (2) a project theme
      that takes advantage of the strengths of the particular
      institution(s), justifying the nature of the research in that
      context, and (3) a research plan that enhances the research
      productivity of all faculty and student investigators involved.

    * A description of any educational activities associated with the
      research, if applicable; how the development of any new course,
      course module, course revision, or academic track, if part of the
      proposed plan, will be fostered and when such new academic
      offerings are expected to be implemented; any plans for sustaining
      implementation beyond the period of the award; how the equipment,
      if requested, will be used for educational activities. Any plans
      for developing multidisciplinary academic majors/minors program
      should also be described, if appropriate.

    * A description of how student involvement in the research project
      and in the presentation of research results will be fostered; how
      the students will be recruited and selected as well as any plans
      for attracting members of underrepresented minority groups to the
      project; how the research will be integrated with the students'
      education; how the equipment, if requested, will enhance the
      research; how maintenance of the equipment beyond the period of
      the award will be sustained.

    * If applicable, a description of any outreach activities that will
      allow the scientific community and the general public to become
      aware of scientific findings resulting from the proposed research;
      any additional activity that will enhance the knowledge and
      appreciation of all students (K-12, undergraduates, etc.) for
      science in general.

    *A section entitled "Results from Prior NSF Support" (if any of the
      participating faculty members has held an NSF award for research
      or instrumentation within the last 5 years). If more than one NSF
      award is involved, this section should describe the project most
      relevant to the proposed new project. This section must describe
      the earlier project and its outcomes in sufficient detail to allow
      reviewers to judge the scientific value of the results achieved in
      the previous NSF-supported project. Brief discussions of the
      outcomes of several projects may be appropriate in a collaborative
      proposal. This part of the project description should not exceed
      two pages.

References Cited (See GPG)

Biographical Sketches

See GPG for format. Faculty participants are encouraged to include in
their "Biographical Sketches" publications with undergraduate co-authors
(with student names labeled by an asterisk).

Budget

See GPG for format and allowable costs. Also, see II.B. above.

Current and Pending Support

See GPG for format. This is required for all key personnel.

Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources (See GPG)

Special Information and Supplementary Documentation

In addition to applicable items listed under the "Special Information
and Supplementary Documentation" section of GPG, C-RUI proposals must
include (1) Impact Statement; (2) Certification of RUI Eligibility; and
(3) Letters of Commitment (4) Alphabetized List of Conflicts.

Impact Statement. All C-RUI proposals must include an Impact Statement
(maximum length - 2 pages). The statement should provide information
that a reviewer will find helpful in assessing the likely impact of the
proposed research activity on the research environment of the
predominantly undergraduate institutions(s), on the career(s) of the
faculty participants, on the development of student participants, and on
the ability of the involved department(s) to prepare students for entry
into advanced-degree programs and/or careers in science and engineering.
An enhanced departmental environment may be reflected in direct student
training in research and in increased involvement of the faculty in
competitive research, which in turn leads to improved student
preparation. It may also be reflected in curricular impact and faculty
development.

The Impact Statement should highlight the record of the department(s)
and institution(s) in educating undergraduates for science and
engineering careers; the plans to attract qualified undergraduate
students to the project, including the criteria for their selection;
provisions that will increase the participation of groups
underrepresented in science and engineering; and any plans for measuring
the effect of participation in the project on the participating students
both during and after their undergraduate years. Also of interest is the
anticipated contribution of new research tools (instrumentation,
databases, etc.) that are useful for educational and research.

The Impact Statement may include information on factors affecting
research productivity such as teaching loads, availability (or lack) of
support personnel, nature of experimental and computational facilities,
and features of the student population. It may also describe
institutional support for research activity by faculty and students and
the anticipated impact of that support on the proposed project.

If educational activities are included in the proposal, the Impact
Statement may also include the impact of such educational activities on
the overall academic offerings of the institutions and the preparation
of students for careers in science.

Certification of RUI Eligibility. The following Certification, executed
by an Authorized Institutional Representative, must be provided in C-RUI
proposals. The signed Certification should be scanned and included in
the proposal as Supplementary Documentation. Institutions are allowed
some leeway in the period over which the number of doctorates is
averaged, in order to avoid negative effects of short-term anomalies in
the number of doctorates awarded.

---------------------------Certification of RUI Eligibility------------------------------------

"By submission of this proposal, the institution hereby certifies that
the originating and managing institution is an institution that offers
courses leading to a bachelor's or master's degree, but has awarded an
average of no more than 10 doctoral degrees per year in NSF-supported
disciplines over the 2-to-5-year period preceding proposal submission."

Authorized Institutional Representative

_______________________________________________________

Typed Name and
Title.....................................Signature..................................Date.............

 

Letters of Commitment. Signed letters of commitment, documenting the
proposed collaborative arrangements of significance to the project,
should be scanned and included in the proposal as supplementary
documentation. Such letters are relevant when collaborators are not
employees of the awardee institution or when the project depends on
access to facilities or instrumentation at other institutions. Letters
of endorsement are not permitted.

Alphabetized List of Conflicts.  A table should be sent as a single
document through the Single Copy Document section of FastLane at the
time of proposal submission. The document should consist of a list in
table form, containing the full names (Last name, first name, middle
initial) and affiliations (institution name and department) of all
people having a conflict of interest with any senior personnel (PI and
Co-PIs) and any named personnel member whose salary is requested in the
project budget. Conflicts to be identified are (1) Ph.D. thesis advisors
or advisees, (2) postdoctoral advisors or advisees, (3) collaborators or
co-authors for the past 48 months, and (4) any other individuals or
institutions with which the investigator has financial ties (please
specify type). Provide only the allowable and applicable items as noted
in the GPG. Include the materials in the FastLane submission by
transferring them as .PDF files through the "Supplementary Docs" module
of the FastLane system.

Proposers are reminded to identify the program announcement/solicitation
number (04-536) in the program announcement/solicitation block on the
proposal Cover Sheet. Compliance with this requirement is critical to
determining the relevant proposal processing guidelines. Failure to
submit this information may delay processing.


B. Budgetary Information

Cost Sharing:

Cost sharing is not required in proposals submitted under this Program
Solicitation.


C. Due Dates

Proposals must be submitted by the following date(s):

Full Proposal Deadline(s) (due by 5 p.m. proposer's local time):

      June 15, 2004


D. FastLane Requirements

Proposers are required to prepare and submit all proposals for this
announcement/solicitation through the FastLane system. Detailed
instructions for proposal preparation and submission via FastLane are
available at: http://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/a1/newstan.htm. For FastLane
user support, call the FastLane Help Desk at 1-800-673-6188 or e-mail
fastlane@nsf.gov  The FastLane Help Desk answers general technical 
questions related to the use of the FastLane system. Specific questions 
related to this program announcement/solicitation should be referred 
to the NSF program staff contact(s) listed in Section VIII of this 
announcement/solicitation.

Submission of Electronically Signed Cover Sheets. The Authorized
Organizational Representative (AOR) must electronically sign the
proposal Cover Sheet to submit the required proposal certifications (see
Chapter II, Section C of the Grant Proposal Guide  for a listing of the
certifications). The AOR must provide the required electronic
certifications within five working days following the electronic
submission of the proposal. Proposers are no longer required to provide
a paper copy of the signed Proposal Cover Sheet to NSF. Further
instructions regarding this process are available on the FastLane
Website at: http://www.fastlane.nsf.gov


VI. PROPOSAL REVIEW INFORMATION


A. NSF Proposal Review Process

Reviews of proposals submitted to NSF are solicited from peers with
expertise in the substantive area of the proposed research or education
project. These reviewers are selected by Program Officers charged with
the oversight of the review process. NSF invites the proposer to
suggest, at the time of submission, the names of appropriate or
inappropriate reviewers. Care is taken to ensure that reviewers have no
conflicts with the proposer. Special efforts are made to recruit
reviewers from non-academic institutions, minority-serving institutions,
or adjacent disciplines to that principally addressed in the proposal.

The National Science Board approved revised criteria for evaluating
proposals at its meeting on March 28, 1997 (NSB 97-72). All NSF proposals
are evaluated through use of the two merit review criteria. In some
instances, however, NSF will employ additional criteria as required to
highlight the specific objectives of certain programs and activities.

On July 8, 2002, the NSF Director issued Important Notice 127, 
Implementation of new Grant Proposal Guide Requirements Related to 
the Broader Impacts Criterion. This Important Notice reinforces the 
importance of addressing both criteria in the preparation and review of 
all proposals submitted to NSF. NSF continues to strengthen its internal 
processes to ensure that both of the merit review criteria are addressed 
when making funding decisions.

In an effort to increase compliance with these requirements, the January
2002 issuance of the GPG incorporated revised proposal preparation
guidelines relating to the development of the Project Summary and
Project Description. Chapter II of the GPG specifies that Principal
Investigators (PIs) must address both merit review criteria in separate
statements within the one-page Project Summary. This chapter also
reiterates that broader impacts resulting from the proposed project must
be addressed in the Project Description and described as an integral
part of the narrative.

Effective October 1, 2002, NSF will return without review proposals that
do not separately address both merit review criteria within the Project
Summary. It is believed that these changes to NSF proposal preparation
and processing guidelines will more clearly articulate the importance of
broader impacts to NSF-funded projects.

The two National Science Board approved merit review criteria are listed
below (see the Grant Proposal Guide. Chapter III.A for further
information). The criteria include considerations that help define them.
These considerations are suggestions and not all will apply to any given
proposal. While proposers must address both merit review criteria,
reviewers will be asked to address only those considerations that are
relevant to the proposal being considered and for which he/she is
qualified to make judgments.

      What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?
      How important is the proposed activity to advancing knowledge and
      understanding within its own field or across different fields? How
      well qualified is the proposer (individual or team) to conduct the
      project? (If appropriate, the reviewer will comment on the quality
      of the prior work.) To what extent does the proposed activity
      suggest and explore creative and original concepts? How well
      conceived and organized is the proposed activity? Is there
      sufficient access to resources?

      What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?
      How well does the activity advance discovery and understanding
      while promoting teaching, training, and learning? How well does
      the proposed activity broaden the participation of
      underrepresented groups (e.g., gender, ethnicity, disability,
      geographic, etc.)? To what extent will it enhance the
      infrastructure for research and education, such as facilities,
      instrumentation, networks, and partnerships? Will the results be
      disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological
      understanding? What may be the benefits of the proposed activity
      to society?

NSF staff will give careful consideration to the following in making
funding decisions:

      Integration of Research and Education
      One of the principal strategies in support of NSF's goals is to
      foster integration of research and education through the programs,
      projects, and activities it supports at academic and research
      institutions. These institutions provide abundant opportunities
      where individuals may concurrently assume responsibilities as
      researchers, educators, and students and where all can engage in
      joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of
      discovery and enrich research through the diversity of learning
      perspectives.

      Integrating Diversity into NSF Programs, Projects, and Activities
      Broadening opportunities and enabling the participation of all
      citizens -- women and men, underrepresented minorities, and
      persons with disabilities -- is essential to the health and
      vitality of science and engineering. NSF is committed to this
      principle of diversity and deems it central to the programs,
      projects, and activities it considers and supports.


B. Review Protocol and Associated Customer Service Standard

All proposals are carefully reviewed by at least three other persons
outside NSF who are experts in the particular field represented by the
proposal. Proposals submitted in response to this
announcement/solicitation will be reviewed by Ad Hoc Review followed by
Panel Review.

Reviewers will be asked to formulate a recommendation to either support
or decline each proposal. The Program Officer assigned to manage the
proposal's review will consider the advice of reviewers and will
formulate a recommendation.

A summary rating and accompanying narrative will be completed and
submitted by each reviewer. In all cases, reviews are treated as
confidential documents. Verbatim copies of reviews, excluding the names
of the reviewers, are sent to the Principal Investigator/Project
Director by the Program Director. In addition, the proposer will receive
an explanation of the decision to award or decline funding.

NSF is striving to be able to tell applicants whether their proposals
have been declined or recommended for funding within six months. The
time interval begins on the date of receipt. The interval ends when the
Division Director accepts the Program Officer's recommendation.

In all cases, after programmatic approval has been obtained, the
proposals recommended for funding will be forwarded to the Division of
Grants and Agreements for review of business, financial, and policy
implications and the processing and issuance of a grant or other
agreement. Proposers are cautioned that only a Grants and Agreements
Officer may make commitments, obligations or awards on behalf of NSF or
authorize the expenditure of funds. No commitment on the part of NSF
should be inferred from technical or budgetary discussions with a NSF
Program Officer. A Principal Investigator or organization that makes
financial or personnel commitments in the absence of a grant or
cooperative agreement signed by the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer
does so at their own risk.


VII. AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION


A. Notification of the Award

Notification of the award is made to the submitting organization by a
Grants Officer in the Division of Grants and Agreements. Organizations
whose proposals are declined will be advised as promptly as possible by
the cognizant NSF Program Division administering the program. Verbatim
copies of reviews, not including the identity of the reviewer, will be
provided automatically to the Principal Investigator. (See section VI.A.
for additional information on the review process.)


B. Award Conditions

An NSF award consists of: (1) the award letter, which includes any
special provisions applicable to the award and any numbered amendments
thereto; (2) the budget, which indicates the amounts, by categories of
expense, on which NSF has based its support (or otherwise communicates
any specific approvals or disapprovals of proposed expenditures); (3)
the proposal referenced in the award letter; (4) the applicable award
conditions, such as Grant General Conditions (NSF-GC-1); * or Federal
Demonstration Partnership (FDP) Terms and Conditions * and (5) any
announcement or other NSF issuance that may be incorporated by reference
in the award letter. Cooperative agreement awards also are administered
in accordance with NSF Cooperative Agreement Terms and Conditions
(CA-1). Electronic mail notification is the preferred way to transmit
NSF awards to organizations that have electronic mail capabilities and
have requested such notification from the Division of Grants and
Agreements.

*These documents may be accessed electronically on NSF's Website at
http://www.nsf.gov/home/grants/grants_gac.htm. Paper copies may be
obtained from the NSF Publications Clearinghouse, telephone (301)
947-2722 or by e-mail from pubs@nsf.gov.

More comprehensive information on NSF Award Conditions is contained in
the NSF Grant Policy Manual (GPM) Chapter II, available electronically
on the NSF Website at http://www.nsf.gov/cgi-bin/getpub?gpm. The GPM is
also for sale through the Superintendent of Documents, Government
Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402. The telephone number at GPO
for subscription information is (202) 512-1800. The GPM may be ordered
through the GPO Website at http://www.gpo.gov.


C. Reporting Requirements

For all multi-year grants (including both standard and continuing
grants), the PI must submit an annual project report to the cognizant
Program Officer at least 90 days before the end of the current budget
period.

Within 90 days after the expiration of an award, the PI also is required
to submit a final project report. Failure to provide final technical
reports delays NSF review and processing of pending proposals for the PI
and all Co-PIs. PIs should examine the formats of the required reports
in advance to assure availability of required data.

PIs are required to use NSF's electronic project reporting system,
available through FastLane, for preparation and submission of annual and
final project reports. This system permits electronic submission and
updating of project reports, including information on project
participants (individual and organizational), activities and findings,
publications, and other specific products and contributions. PIs will
not be required to re-enter information previously provided, either with
a proposal or in earlier updates using the electronic system.


VIII. CONTACTS FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

General inquiries regarding this program should be made to:

    * Sally E. O'Connor, Program Director, Directorate for Biological
      Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, 615 N, telephone:
      (703) 292-8470, email: soconnor@nsf.gov

For questions related to the use of FastLane, contact:

    * FastLane Help Desk, telephone: 1-800-673-6188, email:
      fastlane@nsf.gov 

    *Nicole S Harris, Division of Biological Infrastructure, telephone:
      703-292-8470, email: biofl@nsf.gov 


IX. OTHER PROGRAMS OF INTEREST

The NSF Guide to Programs is a compilation of funding for research and
education in science, mathematics, and engineering. The NSF Guide to
Programs is available electronically at
http://www.nsf.gov/cgi-bin/getpub?gp. General descriptions of NSF
programs, research areas, and eligibility information for proposal
submission are provided in each chapter.

Many NSF programs offer announcements or solicitations concerning
specific proposal requirements. To obtain additional information about
these requirements, contact the appropriate NSF program offices. Any
changes in NSF's fiscal year programs occurring after press time for the
Guide to Programs will be announced in the NSF E-Bulletin, which is 
updated daily on the NSF Website at http://www.nsf.gov/home/ebulletin, 
and in individual program announcements/solicitations. Subscribers 
can also sign up for NSF's Custom News Service 
(http://www.nsf.gov/home/cns/start.htm) to be notified of new funding
opportunities that become available.


ABOUT THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

The National Science Foundation (NSF) funds research and education in
most fields of science and engineering. Awardees are wholly responsible
for conducting their project activities and preparing the results for
publication. Thus, the Foundation does not assume responsibility for
such findings or their interpretation.

NSF welcomes proposals from all qualified scientists, engineers and
educators. The Foundation strongly encourages women, minorities and
persons with disabilities to compete fully in its programs. In
accordance with Federal statutes, regulations and NSF policies, no
person on grounds of race, color, age, sex, national origin or
disability shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or
activity receiving financial assistance from NSF, although some programs
may have special requirements that limit eligibility.

Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities
(FASED) provide funding for special assistance or equipment to enable
persons with disabilities (investigators and other staff, including
student research assistants) to work on NSF-supported projects. See the
GPG Chapter II, Section D.2 for instructions regarding preparation of
these types of proposals.

    The National Science Foundation promotes and advances scientific
    progress in the United States by competitively awarding grants and
    cooperative agreements for research and education in the sciences,
    mathematics, and engineering.

    To get the latest information about program deadlines, to download
    copies of NSF publications, and to access abstracts of awards, visit the
    NSF Website at http://www.nsf.gov

                   * Location:                                  4201 Wilson Blvd.
                                                                  Arlington, VA 22230
                   * For General Information                   (703) 292-5111
                        (NSF Information Center):
                   * TDD (for the hearing-impaired):         (703) 292-5090

                   * To Order Publications or Forms:

                            Send an e-mail to:                    pubs@nsf.gov

                               or telephone:                         (301) 947-2722

                   * To Locate NSF Employees:              (703) 292-5111

PRIVACY ACT AND PUBLIC BURDEN STATEMENTS

The information requested on proposal forms and project reports is
solicited under the authority of the National Science Foundation Act of
1950, as amended. The information on proposal forms will be used in
connection with the selection of qualified proposals; project reports
submitted by awardees will be used for program evaluation and reporting
within the Executive Branch and to Congress. The information requested
may be disclosed to qualified reviewers and staff assistants as part of
the proposal review process; to applicant institutions/grantees to
provide or obtain data regarding the proposal review process, award
decisions, or the administration of awards; to government contractors,
experts, volunteers and researchers and educators as necessary to
complete assigned work; to other government agencies needing information
as part of the review process or in order to coordinate programs; and to
another Federal agency, court or party in a court or Federal
administrative proceeding if the government is a party. Information
about Principal Investigators may be added to the Reviewer file and used
to select potential candidates to serve as peer reviewers or advisory
committee members. See Systems of Records, NSF-50, "Principal
Investigator/Proposal File and Associated Records," 63 Federal Register
267 (January 5, 1998), and NSF-51, "Reviewer/Proposal File and
Associated Records," 63 Federal Register 268 (January 5, 1998).
Submission of the information is voluntary. Failure to provide full and
complete information, however, may reduce the possibility of receiving
an award.

An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to
respond to an information collection unless it displays a valid OMB
control number. The OMB control number for this collection is 3145-0058.
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated
to average 120 hours per response, including the time for reviewing
instructions. Send comments regarding this burden estimate and any other
aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for
reducing this burden, to: Suzanne Plimpton, Reports Clearance Officer,
Division of Administrative Services, National Science Foundation,
Arlington, VA 22230.

OMB control number: 3145-0058.



nsf.gov                   | About NSF | Funding | Publications | News &
                          Media | Search | Site Map | Help



[NSF Celebrating 50 Years]The National Science Foundation
                          4201 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington,
                          Virginia 22230, USA                   Policies
                          Tel: 703-292-5111, FIRS: 800-877-8339 Contact NSF
                          | TDD: 703-292-5090                   Customize
