May 1996

                            Case Study

              Using Automation to Apply Discipline Fairly

                       By Michael Guthrie 

_______________

Lieutenant Guthrie serves in the Fresno, California, Police
Department.
_______________

Meting out discipline is, at best, an unpleasant administrative
task; at worst, it can lead to morale problems and even lawsuits.
Most administrators and employees would agree that the key to an
effective disciplinary system is consistency. Similar
transgressions should receive similar sanctions, thus
establishing a fair and predictable pattern of action and
reaction for everyone in the organization.

An International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) study
concluded that when officers disagree with disciplinary
practices, the primary reason is "...the belief that enforcement
action is inconsistent."1 To be consistent, a proper system of
discipline, according to some researchers, should consider the
seriousness of the offense, the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances, and the officer's personal track record.2 The IACP
recommends that substantially similar conduct should receive
similar penalties. Widely disparate penalties make it difficult
for departments to justify the more serious sanctions.3 While
some departments have established a fixed schedule or matrix of
sanctions appropriate for various offenses,4 the Fresno,
California, Police Department (FPD) opted for a more flexible
system.

In October of 1991, a new chief of the FPD was sworn in. Because
this chief came from outside the department, he did not possess
historical knowledge of the department's disciplinary practices.
He wanted his actions to be consistent and fair, as well as
defensible, should they be appealed to the Civil Service Board.
As a result, when he started to address violations within the
department, he frequently asked the Internal Affairs Unit (IAU)
for records to determine the traditional levels of discipline for
specific violations.

The IAU maintained such records in a cumbersome handwritten log,
which often made it difficult to determine past actions without
extensive research. Moreover, once similar cases had been
identified, they still had to be examined closely to assess the
level of discipline administered and any mitigating or
aggravating circumstances. This time-consuming process needed to
be improved and updated.


To accomplish this, the chief first appointed a lieutenant to
manage the Internal Affairs Unit, which previously had been
staffed by four sergeants and a secretary. He then directed the
internal affairs commander to automate the records of internal
investigations to address the consistency issue. The objective
was to provide management with information, short of a rigid
disciplinary matrix, that would facilitate the fair, yet
flexible, application of discipline throughout the department.

DESIGNING THE SYSTEM

After acquiring appropriate computer hardware and software,5 IAU
staff members surveyed major California police agencies to locate
automated internal affairs records systems to use as a model. The
only one they found did not meet their objectives, so they
started from scratch.

They gave considerable attention to identifying the possible uses
for an automated system. In addition to the primary objective of
identifying the levels of discipline imposed, other functions
were built into the database to address current and future needs.

The major components of the database design included:
  -  17 date fields used to track cases from start to finish
  -  Precise incident details (including date, time, location,    
     sector, and case number)
  -  Demographics of complainant(s) and/or involved police        
     employee(s)
  -  Lists of incident codes covering most conceivable categories 
     of misconduct
  -  Lists of disposition codes
  -  Cross-references to databases on civil claims and            
     officer-involved shootings
  -  Staff recommendations made before and after administrative   
     hearings
  -  Verification of completion of disciplinary actions
  -  A synopsis of all sustained violations using searchable key  
     words.

In short, the designed database exceeded the initial objectives
and included features that gave the IAU some flexibility for the
future.

Once the design had been completed, details from both active and
closed cases were entered into the system. Cases include
externally initiated complaints, as well as internally initiated
formal investigations of rule or policy violations. 

Because the State of California requires that records of
complaints be maintained for a minimum of 5 years, all
investigations from 1987 through 1992 were included. This
produced an initial database of more than 1,300 cases.
Subsequently, a local area network linked the unit's computers,
allowing simultaneous access to the database by the commander,
the investigators, and the secretary. To prevent the inadvertent
destruction of data by users unfamiliar with the intricacies of
the software, data input and editing functions were restricted to
the commander.

After the database was loaded, a number of scripts, or macros,
were developed to use the data. To achieve the project's original
objective, for example, one macro produces reports of comparative
discipline for similar offenses. Another macro generates
disciplinary history records on specific employees, which help
staff members make progressive disciplinary recommendations and
can be used in performance appraisals and reassignment decisions.
Confidential quarterly reports summarizing cases by type, units
of occurrence, and disposition  also can be created quickly and
easily. To help manage deadlines and caseloads, status reports on
all active investigations that have not been processed through
specific stages within established time limits also can be
produced.

OBJECTIVES ACHIEVED

The chief initiated the automation project to help him administer
discipline equitably. As soon as all the cases were entered into
the database, the project achieved this objective. The chief only
had to inquire about the standard of discipline for a specific
category of violation and the 5-year history could be produced in
less than 5 minutes.

The secondary goal was to ensure that the department could defend
its actions readily if challenged by the Civil Service Board. In
a number of cases where the board has inquired about the
consistency of discipline, the IAU staff used the system to
prepare reports demonstrating that employees have been treated
fairly in comparison with their peers with similar disciplinary 
backgrounds.

OTHER POSITIVE RESULTS

The new system provided a number of other positive results as
well. A variety of reports can be prepared quickly and
efficiently, patterns of incidents can be identified more easily,
and case management can be improved substantially.

Saved Time and Money

In the past, it took an average of 1 hour to compile a synopsis
of an employee's disciplinary history using the manual records.
The automated process enables the IAU staff to prepare these
reports in less than a minute, which allows them to produce
quantities that previously were impractical, if not impossible,
due to time constraints. Disciplinary histories have evolved into
a major tool in performance appraisals and special assignments.
Consequently, the new emphasis on disciplinary history has
increased employees' accountability and added a new level of
credibility to the selection and appraisal processes.

Each year, the State Attorney General's Office requires the
department to submit a summary of complaints. This once-onerous
task became quite simple and could be completed in minutes with
the computer instead of in hours by hand.

In addition, prior to automation, IAU staff members had to
generate manual listings of records more than 5 years old so that
the records can be authorized for destruction under state law.
With the new system, the lists could be generated entirely by
computer, saving approximately 20 work-hours per year.

Compared to the manual system, the overall time savings from
automation was estimated at a minimum of 1,000 hours the first
year, or approximately $25,000 worth of staff time. The one-time
cost of the entire computer system amounted to only $15,000. It
more than paid for itself in the first year.

Complaint Patterns Identified

The computerized system allows the staff to sort the data using a
number of variables, such as date, time of day, type of
complaint, unit, race of participants, supervisor responsible for
accused employees, etc. By examining the data in various ways,
patterns can be identified that otherwise might be missed.
Commanders receive information on their units to see if any
patterns or problems can be addressed by training or increased
supervision. Habitual complainants also can be identified more
easily, which can help investigators establish the veracity of
the complaints. Because investigators rotate into and out of the
unit fairly often, they can use the system to obtain the big
picture surrounding new complaints assigned to them.

The IAU staff also can analyze department-wide complaint
characteristics and sort complaints by violation type. With this
information, the IAU commander or the chief can examine
frequently occurring violations to determine the need for policy
modifications, training, and/or increased levels of discipline to
correct employee behavior.

Improved Case Management

Using the case-tracking features of the automated system, the IAU
commander no longer has to review page upon page of handwritten
logs. Instead, a complete status report on outstanding cases can
be generated in approximately 2 minutes. This makes it simple to
monitor cases as they progress through the system, which improves
completion times and eliminates the problem of lost cases. The
expedited investigations also reduce the anxiety of accused
officers awaiting dispositions, which enhances the credibility of
the internal affairs process.

CONCLUSION

To achieve consistency and equity in disciplinary decisionmaking,
the Fresno police chief initiated a project to automate internal
affairs records. The resulting system gives him information on
past practices and facilitates decisions on new cases. In
addition, the database provides a substantial number of other
benefits, some intended and some unforeseen, that improve the
overall quality of discipline management and also reduce costs.

Employees need to be assured of fair treatment. An equitable and
well-documented system of discipline can go a long way toward
dispelling their concerns.
_____________
Endnotes

1 International Association of Chiefs of Police, Executive
Summary: Major Recommendations for Management of Effective Police
Discipline (Arlington, VA: IACP, 1976), 30.

2 Thomas Barker and David L. Carter, Police Deviance (Cincinnati:
Anderson Publishing, 1994), 366.

3 International Association of Chiefs of Police, Managing for
Effective Police Discipline (Arlington, VA: IACP, 1977), 77.

4 Ibid.

5 The system uses a standard 486 33 computer processor and a
common, commercially available database software package.

                   _______________________