      EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY DATA POSTED PURSUANT TO
                        THE NO FEAR ACT
                                                            
FISCAL YEAR 2001, YEAR END DATA

Total number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001:  0

Total number of new individual filers in Fiscal Year 2001:  0

Number of individuals who filed multiple new complaints during Fiscal Year 2001:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on race:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on color:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on religion:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on national origin:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on sex (including Equal Pay Act claims):  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on disability:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
discrimination based on age:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 alleging
retaliation for engaging in protected EEO activity:  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 involving a
non-EEO basis (any basis not covered by applicable equal employment opportunity laws):  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "appointment/hire":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "assignment of duties":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "awards":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "conversion to full time":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "disciplinary action/demotion":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "disciplinary action/reprimand":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "disciplinary action/suspension":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "disciplinary action/removal":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "duty hours":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "evaluation/appraisal":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "examination/test":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "harassment/non-sexual":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "harassment/sexual":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "medical examination":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "pay/overtime":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "promotion/non-selection":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "reassignment/denied":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "reassignment/directed":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "reasonable accommodation":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "reinstatement":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "retirement":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "termination":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "terms/conditions of employment":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "time and attendance":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "training":  0

Number of new formal administrative EEO complaints filed in Fiscal Year 2001 raising an
issue of "other":  0

[Note: Data gathered on bases and issues does not include bases or issues added to a
complaint through amendment after initial filing.  The EEOC requires agencies to exclude
amended bases and issues.  69 Fed. Reg. 3483, 3484, 3486 (January 26, 2001).] 

Average processing time for investigations completed in Fiscal Year 2001, for all
complaints:  n/a

Average processing time for investigations completed in Fiscal Year 2001, for complaints for
which no hearing is ever requested:  n/a

Average processing time for investigations completed in Fiscal Year 2001, for complaints for
which a hearing is later requested:  n/a

Average processing time for processing final agency decisions issued in Fiscal Year 2001, for
all complaints:  n/a

Average processing time for processing final agency decisions issued in Fiscal Year 2001, for
complaints for which a hearing was not requested:  n/a

Average processing time for processing final agency decisions issued in Fiscal Year 2001, for
complaints for which a hearing was requested:  n/a

Number of complaints dismissed in Fiscal Year 2001 pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a):  1

Average length of time complaints dismissed in Fiscal Year 2001 pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a) had been pending prior to dismissal:  89 days

[Note: Only the dismissal of an entire complaint, rather than a dismissal of part of a
complaint (i.e., partial dismissal) is reported.]

Number of final actions in Fiscal Year 2001 involving a finding of discrimination (including
final actions rejecting an Administrative Judge's finding of discrimination):  0

Number (and percentage) of final actions in Fiscal Year 2001 involving a finding of
discrimination rendered without a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of final actions in Fiscal Year 2001 involving a finding of
discrimination rendered after a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on race in Fiscal Year 2001, for
cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on color in Fiscal Year 2001,
for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on
total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on religion in Fiscal Year 2001,
for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on
total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on national origin in Fiscal Year
2001, for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on sex (including Equal Pay
Act claims) in Fiscal Year 2001, for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on disability in Fiscal Year
2001, for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on age in Fiscal Year 2001, for
cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of retaliation for engaging in protected EEO activity in
Fiscal Year 2001, for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on a non-EEO basis (any basis
not covered by applicable equal employment opportunity laws) in Fiscal Year 2001, for cases
in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  n/a

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "appointment/hire," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "assignment of duties," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "awards," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage
is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "conversion to full time," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/demotion," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0
(0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on
number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/reprimand," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0
(0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on
number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/suspension," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0
(0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on
number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/removal," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "duty hours," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "evaluation/appraisal," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "examination/test," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "harassment/non-sexual," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "harassment/sexual," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "medical examination," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "pay/overtime," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "promotion/non-selection," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reassignment/denied," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reassignment/directed," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reasonable accommodation," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0
(0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on
number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reinstatement," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "retirement," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "termination," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "terms/conditions of employment," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0
(0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on
number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "time and attendance," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "training," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage
is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "other," for cases in which the EEOC did not hold a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on race in Fiscal Year 2001, for
cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on color in Fiscal Year 2001,
for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on religion in Fiscal Year 2001,
for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on national origin in Fiscal Year
2001, for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on
total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on sex (including Equal Pay
Act claims) in Fiscal Year 2001, for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on disability in Fiscal Year
2001, for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on
total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on age in Fiscal Year 2001, for
cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based on total
number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of retaliation for engaging in protected EEO activity in
Fiscal Year 2001, for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination based on a non-EEO basis (any basis
not covered by applicable equal employment opportunity laws) in Fiscal Year 2001, for cases
in which the EEOC held a hearing:  n/a

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "appointment/hire," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "assignment of duties," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "awards," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based
on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "conversion to full time," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/demotion," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/reprimand," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/suspension," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "disciplinary action/removal," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "duty hours," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "evaluation/appraisal," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "examination/test," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "harassment/non-sexual," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "harassment/sexual," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "medical examination," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "pay/overtime," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "promotion/non-selection," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reassignment/denied," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reassignment/directed," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reasonable accommodation," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "reinstatement," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage
is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "retirement," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "termination," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "terms/conditions of employment," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%)
[Note: Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "time and attendance," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note:
Percentage is based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of
complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "training," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is
based on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number (and percentage) of findings of discrimination in Fiscal Year 2001 involving an issue
of "other," for cases in which the EEOC held a hearing:  0 (0%) [Note: Percentage is based
on total number of findings of discrimination, not on number of complaints filed.]

Number of complaints pending in Fiscal Year 2001 that were filed prior to Fiscal Year
2001:  1

Number of individual filers associated with the pending complaints filed prior to Fiscal Year
2001:  1

Number of pending complaints filed prior to Fiscal Year 2001 that were pending at the
"investigative" step of processing in Fiscal Year 2001:  0

Number of pending complaints filed prior to Fiscal Year 2001 that were pending at the
"hearing" processing step (before the EEOC):  0 

Number of pending complaints filed prior to Fiscal Year 2001 that were pending at the
"agency final action" processing step in Fiscal Year 2001:  0

Number of pending complaints filed prior to Fiscal Year 2001 that were pending at the
"administrative appeals" processing step (before the EEOC) in Fiscal Year 2001:  1

Number of complaints pending during Fiscal Year 2001 for which an investigation that was
completed in Fiscal Year 2001 was untimely:  0
