Aug. 18, 2005

Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

William Steigerwald
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-5017) 

RELEASE: 05-229

NASA'S SWIFT SATELLITE FINDS NEWBORN BLACK HOLES

Scientists using NASA's Swift satellite say they have found newborn 
black holes, just seconds old, in a confused state of existence. The 
holes are consuming material falling into them while somehow 
propelling other material away at great speeds.

These black holes are born in massive star explosions. An initial 
blast obliterates the star, yet the chaotic black hole activity 
appears to re-energize the explosion several times in just a few 
minutes. This is a dramatically different view of star death, one 
that entails multiple explosive outbursts and not just a single bang, 
as previously thought.

"Stars are exploding two, three and sometimes four times in the first 
minutes following the initial explosion," said Prof. David Burrows of 
Penn State, University Park, Pa. "First comes a blast of gamma rays 
followed by intense pulses of X-rays. The energies involved are much 
greater than anyone expected," he added.

Scientists have seen this phenomenon in nearly half of the longer 
gamma-ray bursts detected by Swift. These gamma-ray bursts are the 
most powerful explosions known. They are forerunners of a massive 
star explosion called a hypernova, which is bigger than a supernova. 
Using Swift, scientists are finally able to see gamma-ray bursts 
within minutes after the trigger, instead of hours or days, and are 
privy to newborn black hole activity.

Until this latest Swift discovery, scientists assumed a simple 
scenario of a single explosion followed by a graceful afterglow of 
the dying embers. The new scenario of a blast followed by a series of 
powerful "hiccups" is particularly evident in a gamma-ray burst from 
May 2, 2005, named GRB 050502B. This burst lasted 17 seconds during 
the early morning hours in the constellation Leo. About 500 seconds 
later, Swift detected a spike in X-ray light about 100 times brighter 
than anything seen before.

Previously there had been hints of an "X-ray bump" between the burst 
and afterglow in previous gamma-ray bursts, coming a minute or so 
after the burst. Swift has seen more than one dozen clear cases of 
multiple explosions. There are several theories to describe this 
newly discovered phenomenon and most point to the presence of a 
newborn black hole.

"The newly formed black hole immediately gets to work," said Prof. 
Peter Meszaros of Penn State, head of the Swift theory team. "We 
aren't clear on the details yet, but it appears to be messy. Matter 
is falling into the black hole, which releases a great amount of 
energy. Other matter gets blasted away from the black hole and flies 
out into the interstellar medium. This is by no means a smooth 
operation," he added.

Another theory is the jet of material shooting away from the dead star 
starts to fall back onto itself, creating shockwaves in the jet core 
that ram together blobs of gas and produce X-ray light.

"None of this was realized before simply because we couldn't get to 
the scene of the explosion fast enough," said Dr. Neil Gehrels of 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., Swift principal 
investigator. "Swift has the unique ability to detect bursts and turn 
its X-ray and ultraviolet-optical telescopes to the explosion's 
embers within minutes. As such, Swift is detecting new burst details 
that might rewrite theory," Gehrels said.

Swift carries three main instruments: the Burst Alert Telescope (BAT); 
X-ray Telescope (XRT); and the Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT). 
Today's announcement is based largely on XRT data. The XRT was built 
at Penn State with partners at the Brera Astronomical Observatory in 
Italy and the University of Leicester in England.

Swift was launched in November 2004. It is a NASA mission in 
partnership with the Italian Space Agency and the Particle Physics 
and Astronomy Research Council, United Kingdom. Swift is managed by 
Goddard. Penn State controls science and flight operations from the 
Mission Operations Center in University Park, Pa. The spacecraft was 
built in collaboration with national laboratories, universities and 
international partners.

A paper discussing these findings appears online today on Science 
Express and in the September 9 issue of Science. Burrows is lead 
author of the paper.

For more information about this research on the Web, visit: 

http://www.nasa.gov/vision/universe/watchtheskies/double_burst.html

	
-end-
