
   MARION F. COLE, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF DEBORAH D.
EISENHUT, DECEASED, PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 88-406

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1988

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Eleventh Circuit

   Brief For The United States In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 12a-32a) is reported
at 846 F.2d 1290.  The opinion of the district court (Pet. App.
1a-10a) is reported at 651 F. Supp. 221.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 34a-35a) was
entered on June 10, 1988.  A petition for rehearing was denied on
August 4, 1988 (Pet. App. 33a).  The petition for a writ of certiorari
was filed on September 7, 1988.  The jurisdiction of this Court is
invoked under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the courts below erred in granting summary judgment to the
United States on the ground that Florida law imposes no duty upon the
employer of an independent contractor to supervise safety at the
contractor's premises.

                               STATEMENT

   1. Petitioner is the personal representative of Deborah Eisenhut,
an employee of Ordnance Research, Inc. (ORI), who was killed in an
explosion at an ORI laboratory in Fort Walton Beach, Florida.  When
the explosion occurred, Ms. Eisenhut was loading smoke cartridges with
an ORI compound known as 119G.  ORI was manufacturing 119G pursuant to
a contract with the U.S. Army Armament Research and Development
Command (ARRADCOM) that called for ARRADCOM to purchase 1,500
cartridges from ORI at a total cost of less than $10,000.  ORI has
developed 119G to meet ARRADCOM's demand for a composition that would
create a flash and signature smoke for mortar practice rounds.  Pet.
App. 1a-2a.

   Under Armed Services Procurement Regulations (32 C.F.R. Pts. 1-101
(1982)), /1/ contracts involving ammunition and explosives are
governed by safety procedures set forth in the Department of Defense
Contractors' Safety Manual for Ammunition, Explosives, and Related
Dangerous Materials (Safety Manual).  A prescribed safety clause to
this effect is automatically included in such contracts.  The head of
procurement at ARRADCOM, however, has discretion either to omit this
safety compliance clause entirely, thereby eliminating the application
of the Safety Manual to the contract, or to include the clause but
waive any mandatory requirements of the Safety Manual.  See 32 C.F.R.
1.323.1(c) (1982).  ARRADCOM has made a policy decision to make the
requirements of the Safety Manual mandatory at all contractor owned
and operated facilities except when orders are placed for "standard
commercial items" in an amount less than $10,000.  Pet. App. 3a.

   The Chief of the Support Contracting Division, Procurement
Directorate, of ARRADCOM elected not to include the safety clause in
ARRADCOM's contract with ORI.  Accordingly, ARRADCOM did not exercise
its right to supervise safety at ORI's premises pursuant to the terms
of the Safety Manual, nor did ARRADCOM insist that ORI adhere to the
Safety Manual's specifications.  Pet. App. 3a.  ORI did, however, take
precautions against an accidental explosion caused by static
electricity.  ORI required Ms. Eisenhut to wear a Wriststat to ground
herself while she worked with 119G.  Although the precise cause of the
February 28, 1980, explosion is uncertain, Ms. Eisenhut was seen not
wearing her Wriststat shortly prior to the accident.  Id. at 24a.

   2. After her administrative claim under the Federal Tort Claims Act
was denied, petitioner filed this lawsuit alleging that ARRADCOM's
failure to enforce or comply with procedures detailed in the Safety
Manual helped cause the explosion.  Petitioner also alleged that
ARRADCOM failed to notify ORI of 119G's dangerous nature and that
ARRADCOM breached its duty to inform ORI that government inspectors
had observed safety violations during 119G's manufacture.

   Following extensive discovery and oral argument, the district court
on December 23, 1986, granted summary judgment for the United States
(Pet. App. 1a-10a).  The court noted (id. at 2a-6a) that ARRADCOM
exercised policy-making discretion when it decided, pursuant to 32
C.F.R. 1-323.1 (1982), to omit the safety clause from its contract
with ORI.  Accordingly, the court found (Pet. App. 6a) that the
discretionary function exception to the FTCA barred any claim against
the United States for Ms. Eisenhut's injuries based on ORI's alleged
failure to comply with procedures in the Safety Manual.

   The district court also concluded (Pet. App. 6a-8a) that ARRADCOM
had breached no duty that it owed to Ms. Eisenhut under Florida law.
The court noted (id. at 6a-7a) that Florida law imposes no duty upon
employers to assure the safety of employees of independent
contractors.  The court further found inapplicable (id. at 8a) the
exceptions to this general rule for employers who exercise supervisory
control over the employees of independent contractors or who own the
premises where an accident occurs.  /2/

   3. The court of appeals affirmed (Pet. App. 12a-32a).  The court
found (id. at 22a) that Florida law does not impose any duty on the
purchaser of goods to notify the manufacturer of hazards involved in
the production process.  Moreover, the court concluded (id. at
22a-28a) that, even if ARRADCOM has such a duty, the record contained
no evidence suggesting that ARRADCOM had superior knowledge of any
dangers posed by small-volume manufacture of compound 119G.  The court
also found (id. at 29a-32a) that Florida law imposed no obligation on
parties hiring independent contractors to provide a safe workplace for
the contractors' employees.  Accordingly, the court concluded that
petitioner had asserted no plausible theory that would render the
United States liable had it been a private party acting under Florida
law.  The court, therefore, found (id. at 32a n.13) no reason to reach
the issue resolved by the district court of whether the discretionary
function exception to the FTCA would bar petitioner's claim.  /3/

                               ARGUMENT

   The decision below is correct.  It does not conflict with any
decision of this Court or any other court of appeals.  Accordingly, no
further review is warranted.

   1. Petitioner contends (Pet. 6-9) that the discretionary function
exception to the FTCA, 28 U.S.C. 2680(a), does not bar her suit.  As
the court of appeals correctly noted (Pet. App. 32a n.13), however,
summary judgment for the United States was properly granted regardless
of whether Section 2680(a) barred petitioner's claim.  The FTCA
renders the United States liable for tort claims "in the same manner
and to the same extent as a private individual under like
circumstances." 28 U.S.C. 2674.  Accordingly, petitioner could prevail
only if she could establish that ARRADCOM breached a duty that a
private party would owe to an employee of an independent contractor
under similar circumstances.  As the courts below correctly found
(Pet. App. 6a-8a, 21a-32a), Florida courts have repeatedly adhered to
"the general rule that one who hires an independent contractor is not
liable for injuries sustained by that contractor's employees in their
work." Skow v. Department of Transportation, 468 So. 2d 422, 423 (Fla.
Dist. Ct. App. 1985).  Accord City of Miami v. Perez, 509 So. 2d 343,
345 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App.), review denied, 519 So. 2d 987 (Fla. 1987);
Crawford v. Florida Steel Corp., 478 So. 2d 855 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App.
1985);  Van Ness v. Independent Construction Co., 392 So. 2d 1017
(Fla. Dist. Ct. App.), review denied, 402 So. 2d 614 (Fla. 1981).

   Petitioner contends (Pet. 5) that ARRADCOM failed to conduct
adequate safety inspections and failed to insist on adherence to the
Safety Manual.  The Florida Court of Appeals has clearly held,
however, that an employer hiring an independent contractor is not
responsible for failing to supervise conditions at the work site.  Van
Ness, 392 So. 2d at 1019-1020.  Liability will not be imposed simply
because the employer fails to monitor the contractor's compliance with
safety regulations.  Skow, 468 So. 2d at 424.  Moreover, even when an
accident occurs on the employer's premises, the employer will be
liable only if it commits "identifiable acts of negligence" (Perez,
509 So. 2d at 346).  Here, petitioner alleges (Pet. 5) that government
employees witnessed the conditions at the ORI facility and failed to
correct them.  The Florida courts, however, have explicitly held (see,
e.g., Perez, 509 So. 2d at 347) that the mere presence of an on-site
inspector is insufficient to create employer liability, and there is
no evidence to suggest that government employees observed hazards that
they had reason to suspect ORI itself did not perceive.  In short,
Florida law would afford no relief to petitioner suing a private party
under similar circumstances.  Accordingly, petitioner had no cause of
action under the FTCA.

   2. Petitioner misunderstands the import of the lower courts' ruling
concerning Florida law and consequently offers no serious challenge to
it.  Instead, petitioner claims (Pet. 9-10) that the courts below
resolved disputed issues of fact in a manner contrary to the standards
governing summary judgment set forth in Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477
U.S. 317 (1986), and Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242
(1986).  As Anderson makes clear (477 U.S. at 247-250), however, the
district court's role when deciding a summary judgment motion is to
review the evidence presented and to determine whether a reasonable
jury could properly infer that the nonmoving party had met its burden
of persuasion.  Here, following extensive discovery, the district
court correctly concluded (Pet. App. 6a-8a) that no record evidence
would support a jury verdict for petitioner because ARRADCOM breached
no duties owed to petitioner under Florida law.

   The court of appeals carefully reviewed the record (Pet. App.
22a-28a) under the assumption that Florida law might impose an
additional duty on ARRADCOM to notify ORI if ARRADCOM knew of dangers
posed by 119G and ARRADCOM knew or had reason to know that ORI was
unaware of these dangers.  Applying the proper summary judgment
standard, the court of appeals concluded (id. at 24a) that "the
inference cannot be made that ARRADCOM possessed such knowledge."
Petitioner identifies no evidence nor suggests any inference to
contest this conclusion.  Indeed, ORI's own safety practices suggested
that ORI was fully aware of the hazards involved in manufacturing 119G
(see id. at 24a-28a).  Accordingly, summary judgment was properly
granted because the record contained no evidence suggesting that
ARRADCOM had breached any duty owed to petitioner under Florida law.

   3. Petitioner insists (Pet. 6) that the "central issue" in this
case is whether the discretionary function exception bars a claim
based on the government's failure to enforce mandatory safety
regulations.  Even assuming that the discretionary function exception
does not bar petitioner's suit, however, petitioner must nonetheless
state a cause of action against the United States under Florida law.
Since both courts below have concluded that petitioner has failed to
do so, and since petitioner does not seriously challenge that
conclusion, there is, as the court of appeals concluded, no occasion
even to consider whether the discretionary function exception would
bar such a suit.

   In any event, even if ARRADCOM had been responsible for the safety
of ORI employees under Florida law, the district court correctly
concluded (Pet. App. 4a-6a) that petitioner's claims were foreclosed
by the discretionary function exception.  As this Court explained in
United States v. S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea Rio Grandense (Varig
Airlines), 467 U.S. 797, 819-820 (1984), "(w)hen an agency determines
the extent to which it will supervise the safety procedures of private
individuals, it is exercising discretionary regulatory authority of
the most basic kind." The district court therefore correctly
determined (Pet. App. 4a-5a) that ARRADCOM's decision not to
incorporate the provisions of the Safety Manual in the contract with
ORI was an exercise of discretion immune from suit under the FTCA.

   Petitioner, relying on this Court's recent decision in Berkovitz v.
United States, No. 87-498 (June 13, 1988), contends that Varig
Airlines is inapposite because ARRADCOM had a mandatory duty to
include a clause in the purchase contract incorporating the Safety
Manual.  The relevant regulation (32 C.F.R. 1-323.1(c) (1982)) here,
however, explicity authorized a procuring agency to omit the safety
clause.  Pursuant to that regulation, ARRADCOM made a policy decision
to permit contracting officers to omit the clause for all purchase
contracts for standard commercial items in amounts less than $10,000
(Pet. App. 3a).  ARRADCOM's contract with ORI covered smoke cartridges
purchased for $8,935, and ARRADCOM's contracting officers exercised
their discretion to omit the safety clause after determining that the
cartridges were standard commercial items, a term not defined by
statute or regulation.  Since the contracting officers were required
to balance the explicit regulatory goal of reducing administrative
costs on small purchases (32 C.F.R. 3-601 (1982)) with the safety
gains expected from compliance with the manual, the choice concerning
whether to include the safety clause involved a "policy judgment" that
both Berkovitz (slip op. 4-5) and Varig Airlines (467 U.S. at 820)
clearly shield from suit.  /4/

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   JOHN R. BOLTON

      Assistant Attorney General

   JEREMY PAUL

      Attorney

   NOVEMBER 1988

   /1/ The regulations governing ARRADCOM's contract with ORI were
known first as the Armed Services Procurement Regulations and later as
the Defense Acquisition Regulations and were codified at 32 C.F.R.
Pts. 1-39 (1982).  These regulations have been superseded and replaced
by the Federal Acquisition Regulations codified in Title 48 of the
Code of Federal Regulations.  Because the original regulations
continue to apply to contracts entered into while they were in force,
citations to the original regulations are used throughout.

   /2/ The district court also rejected (Pet. App. 9a-10a) plaintiff's
claim that the government negligently communicated misinformation
about the hazard level of compound 119G on the ground that it was
barred by the misrepresentation exception of the FTCA, 28 U.S.C.
2680(h).

   /3/ Following this Court's intervening decision in Berkovitz v.
United States, No. 87-498 (June 13, 1988), petitioner filed a petition
for rehearing asking the court of appeals to reconsider its opinion on
the discretionary function issue.  The court of appeals denied the
petition without opinion (Pet. App. 33a).

   /4/ Petitioner's reliance upon McMichael v. United States, 751 F.2d
303 (8th Cir. 1985), is similary misplaced.  In McMichael, the Defense
Department had included in its purchase contract with the manufacturer
the clause incorporating the Safety Manual that ARRADCOM explicitly
omitted here.  Accordingly, the Eighth Circuit concluded (751 F.2d at
304 (emphasis added)) that the FTCA did not bar "the plaintiffs from
recovery for failure to enforce compliance with the safety
requirements of the contract." The Eighth Circuit thus found (id. at
307) that the government's failure to discover safety violations on
the manufacturer's premises did not involve the exercise of discretion
because the Defense Department had already exercised its discretion to
undertake the safety requirements of the Safety Manual and had three
on-site inspectors to enforce those requirements.  ARRADCOM, by
contrast, chose not to include the safety clause in its contract with
ORI, and it assumed no responsibility for safety at ORI's premises.
