Michael Braukus
Headquarters, Washington, DC                November 27, 1996
(Phone:  202/358-1979)

Lori Rachul
Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, OH
(Phone:  216/433-8806)

RELEASE:  96-248

NASA-DEVELOPED LASER MAY DETECT SERIOUS EYE DISEASE EARLY

     Ophthalmologists may be able to trace the early symptoms 
of eye diseases and spot cataracts before they are severe 
enough to require surgery thanks to an agreement between NASA 
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Eye 
Institute (NEI).

     The agreement will use the unique talents and experience 
of both agencies to explore the use of a NASA-developed laser 
light scattering diagnostic probe for early detection and 
diagnosis of eye diseases such as cataracts, diabetic 
retinopathy, and the inflammatory diseases of the anterior 
chamber of the eye.

     The goal of this agreement is to perfect and test the 
NASA advanced fiber optic eye diagnostic system's ability to 
detect the early subtle changes during the development of 
cataracts and other eye diseases.  The second goal is to 
evaluate, assess and apply the instrumentation in a broader 
spectrum of uses for laser light scattering that would 
benefit eye research at NIH and the external biomedical 
community.

        The NASA-developed laser light scattering diagnostic 
probe has already been used in experiments investigating 
cataracts during the early stages of formation.  The 
instrument is nearly ready for clinical trials.

     The fiber optic probe—about the size of a pencil—can 
detect protein crystals suspended in the fluid inside the 
eyes.  Ophthalmologists suspect that it is these crystallins 
that form the cloudy mass that leads to cataracts.  Without 
having to penetrate the eye, the probe allows for the study 
of the eye's anterior chamber, lens and posterior chamber.

     The research conducted between NASA and NEI on this 
fiber optic probe could allow ophthalmologists to trace the 
beginnings of eye diseases and invent treatments to combat 
them before they reach a stage where surgical intervention is 
necessary.  The agreement will allow characterization of the 
instrument, aiding in its eventual commercial acceptance and 
FDA approval, and ensuring its eventual availability in the 
biomedica community.

                           -end-
