
   CORPORATION OF THE PRESIDING BISHOP OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST
OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, ET AL., APPELLANTS V. CHRISTINE J. AMOS, ET AL.

   UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, APPELLANT V. CHRISTINE J. AMOS, ET AL.

   No. 86-179 and 86-401

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1986

   On Appeals from the United States District Court for the District
of Utah

   Brief for the United States

                       PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING

   The parties to this proceeding are identified in the jurisdictional
statement filed by the private appellants in this case, Corporation of
the Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints v. Amos, No. 86-179 (at ii).

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Parties to the proceeding
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Question presented
   Constitutional and statutory provisions involved
   Statement
   Summary of argument
   Argument:
      Section 702 does not violate the Establishment
      Clause
      A. Section 702 is a permissible accommodation of
         religion
         1. This Court has made clear that government
            may accommodate religion through exemptions from
            from generally applicable regulatory standards
         2. Section 702 minimizes entanglement between
            government and religion and effects no sponsorship
            or financial assistance of religion
      B. Section 702 therefore satisfies the test set
         in Lemon v. Kurtzman
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The order and final judgment of the district court (J.S. App.
83a-87a) is unreported.  /1/ The prior opinion of the district court
granting in part appellees' motion for summary judgment (J.S. App.
88a-122a) is reported at 618 F. Supp. 1013.  The prior opinion of the
district court denying the private appellants' motion to dismiss (J.S.
App. 1a-82a) is reported at 594 F. Supp. 791.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the district court was entered on May 16, 1986.
The private appellants filed a notice of appeal to this Court on June
9, 1986 (J.S. App. 130a), and their appeal was docketed on August 4,
1986.  The United States filed a notice of appeal to this Court on
June 13, 1986 (86-401 J.S. App. 1a-2a).  On August 6, 1986, Justice
White issued an order extending the time within which to docket the
government's appeal to and including September 11, 1986, and the
appeal was docketed on that date.  On November 3, 1986, this Court
issued an order consolidating the two cases and postponing further
consideration of the question of jurisdiction until the hearing of the
cases on the merits.  The jurisdiction of this Court rests upon 28
U.S.C. 1252.

           CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED

   1. The First Amendment of the United States Constitution provides
in pertinent part:

         Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
      religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.

   2. Section 702 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-1,
provides:

         This subchapter shall not apply to an employer with respect
      to the employment of aliens outside any State, or to a religious
      corporation, association, educational institution, or society
      with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular
      religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such
      corporation, association, educational institution, or society of
      its activities.

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether Section 702 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C.
2000e-1, which exempts all activities conducted by religious
organizations from the statutory prohibition against discrimination in
employment on the basis of religion, is invalid under the
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the extent that it
exempts the secular activities of such organizations from the
prohibition against religious discrimination.

                               STATEMENT

   1. The Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (CPB) and the Corporation of the President
of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (COP), conduct a
variety of activities on behalf of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.  /2/ One of these activities is the operation of
the Deseret Gymnasium, a recreational facility located in Salt Lake
City, Utah, that is open to the general public and is used for
physical exercise and athletic games.  The gymnasium was constructed
on property owned by the CPB with funds supplied by the COP.
Moreover, the gymnasium has no independent financial existence;
purchases and hiring for the gymnasium are conducted under the
auspices of the COP, and the COP absorbs the gymnasium's operating
losses.  Finally, with the exception of the portion of the gymnasium
leased to outside franchisees, the gymnasium is exempt from real
estate taxes on the ground that the premises are used exclusively for
charitable and religious purposes.  J.S. App. 2a-4a, 11a-15a, 94a;
Affidavit of Leon Heaps, dated June 10, 1983, at 2;  Affidavit of Leon
F. Olsen, dated June 12, 1983, at 3;  Supplemental Answers to
Plaintiffs' Third Set of Interrogatories at 28, 35.

   The operation of the gymnasium also is tied to the Church.  The
gymnasium's governing board is appointed by the Church's religious
leadership and is composed of church officials.  Although the work of
the gymnasium's employees is not part of the Church's worship or
ritual, the purpose of the gymnasium is to provide a place at which
Church members and other persons "may participate in athletic
activities in an atmosphere expressive of (the Church's) moral and
health standards." Supplemental Answers to Plaintiffs' Third Set of
Interrogatories at 27-28;  see also Heaps Affidavit at 2.  The Church
makes the gymnasium's facilities available to charitable and social
organizations as part of the charitable service that is a "primary
tenet" of its religious doctrine.  Supplemental Answers to Plaintiffs'
Third Set of Interrogatories at 28;  see also Heaps Affidavit at 3.

   Under the Church's doctrine, "(t)he most sacred ceremonies * * *
are performed in Temples.  Unlike the Church chapels and
meetinghouses, which are used for public worship on the Sabbath and
for Church activities throughout the week, Temples are open only to
certain eligible members of the Church" (Affidavit of Dallin H. Oaks,
dated April 12, 1985, at 5).  A member's eligibility to enter a Temple
is documented by a card called a "temple recommend." To obtain a
temple recommend, the member is interviewed by Church officials "to
determine whether (he) sustain(s) the leadership of the Church and
(is) living according to Church doctrine and standards" (id. at 7).
The requirements for obtaining a temple recommend thus include
observance of dietary laws, attendance at religious ceremonies, and
tithing to the Church of one tenth or more of the member's income.

   The record indicates that since 1969 the Church's policy regarding
employment at several Church-owned activities -- including the Deseret
Gymnasium -- has been governed by the following considerations:

         a. Employees of the Church are expected to uphold the
      standards of the Church both on and off the job.

         b. Many people judge the Church by the actions and attitudes
      of one of its employees.  The mere fact that an individual is
      employed by the Church signifies to others that his actions are
      condoned by the Church.  Therefore, off-the-job standards
      reflect greatly on the Church's reputation.

         c. Continued employment in the Church is dependent on the
      employees living their lives so as to be worthy of a temple
      recommend.

Affidavit of John Russel Homer, dated April 12, 1985, at 3.  /3/ Among
the reasons for this employment policy are that "(s)alaries paid
Church employees are obtained primarily from contributions from
members of the Church donated to support Church activities.  The
Church believes that it should benefit members with employment
possibilities in which those contributed funds are enpended";  and
that "(t)he eligible member's belief in the doctrines and tenets of
the * * * Church develops a special commitment to the inspired
leadership of the * * * Church and gives all * * * Church activities
the advantage of a committed, loyal work force." Supplemental Answers
to Plaintiffs' Third Set of Interrogatories at 18-19.  /4/

   Appellee Frank Mayson was employed at the Deseret Gymnasium as an
engineer responsible for maintaining the building's physical plant.
In 1980, the Church initiated a review of its employees to determine
whether its personnel policy was being followed.  Mayson states that
the director of the gymnasium informed him that he had not qualified
for a temple recommend because he was not attending church services
regularly or contributing his tithing to the Church and that he would
lose his job unless he qualified for a temple recommend within six
months.  Mayson did not qualify and was discharged on April 10, 1981.
J.S. App. 31-4a, 17a, 119a;  Homer Affidavit at 4;  Affidavit of
Arthur Mayson, dated August 16, 1983, at 4-5, 7.

   2. Mayson and several other individuals who lost jobs in Church
activities because they did not obtain a temple recommend subsequently
commenced this action against the COP and the CPB in the United States
District Court for the District of Utah.  /5/ The plaintiffs claimed
that the discharges for failure to obtain a temple recommend
constituted discrimination in employment on the basis of religion in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C.
2000e-2(a).  /6/

   The COP and the CPB moved to dismiss the action, relying on Section
702 of Title VII, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-1, which states that Title VII
"shall not apply * * * to a religious corporation * * * with respect
to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform
work connected with the carrying on by such corporation * * * of its
activities." The district court denied the motion, holding that
Section 702 violated the Establishment Clause insofar as it exempted
the secular activities of religious organizations from the provisions
of Title VII prohibiting religious discrimination (J.S. App. 1a-82a).

   Starting from the premise that religious activities conducted by
religious organizations could permissibly be exempted from Title VII's
nondiscrimination mandate, the district court as a threshold matter
considered whether the Deseret Gymnasium constituted a religious
activity.  The court formulated a three-part test for determining
whether an activity conducted by a religious organization is
"religious" or "secular." It first evaluated "the tie between the
religious organization and the (gymnasium) with regard to areas such
as financial affairs, day-to-day operations and management" (J.S. App.
10a).  Observing that Church officials appoint the members of the
governing board of the Deseret Gymnasium and that the gymnasium has no
financial existence independent of the COP (id. at 11a-12a), the court
concluded that "there is an intimate connection between Deseret and
the defendants and the Mormon Church" (id. at 12a).

   The court next considered whether there was "a clear relationship
between the primary function which Deseret performs and the religious
beliefs and tenets of the Mormon Church or church administration"
(J.S. App. 13a).  It found that "(a)lthough the Mormon Church has
expressed its desire that members of the Mormon Church engage in
physical exercise and (has) attempted to provide a facility to
accommodate that desire in an atmosphere which exemplifies its
beliefs, the function of Deseret is far from closely related to any
religious beliefs or tenets of the Mormon Church or church
administration" (id. at 16a (footnote omitted)).  The court concluded
that the Deseret Gymnasium instead serves the same functions as other
gymnasiums.

   Finally, because it had found no close connection between the
gymnasium and church doctrine or administration, the court inquired
further concerning appellee Mayson's particular job.  It found that
"(n)one of (Mayson's) duties is even tangentially related to any
conceivable religious belief or ritual of the Mormon Church or church
administration" (J.S. App. 17a).  It therefore concluded that the
operation of the gymnasium did not constitute a religious activity.

   Turning to the question whether the application of Section 702 to a
religious organization's secular activities violates the Establishment
Clause, the district court evaluated the constitutionality of Section
702 by utilizing the three-part test prescribed by this Court in Lemon
v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971).  The district court first found that
the 1972 amendment to Section 720 extending the exemption to all of
the activities of religious organizations was supported by the secular
purpose of limiting government interference with religious activities.
 The court observed that "(t)he legislative goal of assuring that the
government remains neutral and does not meddle in religious affairs by
interfering with the decision-making process in religions is a valid
secular purpose.  Furthermore, there is no indication the Congress
amended section 702 for a religious purpose or to promote religion or
religious beliefs" (J.S. App. 40a (footnote omitted)).

   The court concluded, however, that Section 702 failed the second
part of the Lemon test because the provision has the primary effect of
advancing religion.  The court acknowledged that "'the limits of
permissible state accommodation of religion are by no means
co-extensive with the noninterference mandate of the free exercise
clause'" (J.S. App. 42a-43a, quoting Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S.
664, 673 (1970)), but it stated that "if a statute goes beyond what is
mandated by the free exercise clause in accommodating religion, the
statute may no longer maintain the requisite course of constitutional
neutrality" (J.S. App. 43a).  The court then determined (id. at
43a-58a) that the exemption of the secular activities of religious
organizations from Title VII's prohibition against religious
discrimination is not necessary to avoid excessive government
entanglement with religion and is not compelled by the Free Exercise
Clause.

   The court also found that Section 702 lacks "characteristics that
the Supreme Court has looked to in declaring statutes valid as against
claims of establishment clause violations" (J.S. App. 66a).  It
observed that the exemption did not extend to "a broad spectrum of
groups" but was limited to religious organizations (id. at 61a), the
exemption was not supported by historical tradition or by any threat
of hostility to religion, and the exemption was not justified by the
concerns underlying the Free Exercise Caluse (id. at 66a-69a).  The
court found that Section 702 instead amounts to government sponsorship
of religion because it allows religious organizations to increase
their influence over the secular economy and "grant(s) religious
organizations an exclusive authorization to engage in conduct which
can directly and immediately advance religious tenets and practices"
(J.S. App. 70a).

   Finally, the district court applied the third prong of the Lemon
test, considering whether Section 702 fostered excessive government
entanglement with religion.  The court found that the exemption
enables a religious organization to exercise "coercive power" over the
religious beliefs of its employees, and that this "potential for
impermissible fostering of religion" supports a "finding of excessive
entanglement" (J.S. App. 74a).  The court observed, however, that
"Section 702 does not require the type of comprehensive,
discriminatory and continuous state or federal surveillance that was
condemned in cases such as Lemon.  * * * On the contrary, this
exemption was designed to minimize involvement and entanglement
between church and state and to ensure that the government and courts
do not go through the rigors of inspecting and analyzing whether the
activities in which a religious entity is engaging are religious or
secular, thus avoiding an intimate and continuing relationship between
church and state" (J.S. App. 74a-75a (footnote omitted)).

   The court concluded that it was not necessary to balance the three
Lemon factors.  It found that "the direct and immediate effect of the
exemption of religious organizations from Title VII for religious
discrimination in secular, non-religious activities is to advance
religion in violation of the establishment clause of the first
amendment to the United States Constitution" (J.S. App. 75a).  /7/
Implicitly holding that the discharge of appellee Mayson was the
result of religious discrimination, the court concluded that the
discharge violated Title VII.  It ordered the reinstatement of
appellee Mayson and awarded back pay with interest (J.S. App.
116a-120a).  On January 22, 1986, the court entered a final judgment
in favor of appellee Mayson under Rule 54(b) of the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure (see J.S. App. 128a).

   The district court vacated this judgment on February 4, 1986, and
on February 5 issued an order (J.S. App. 127a-129a) certifying to the
Attorney General of the United States that the constitutionality of
Section 702 has been drawn into question in the present case (see 28
U.S.C. 2403(a)).  The United States intervened and filed a brief
defending the constitutionality of Section 702.  Following a hearing,
the district court reaffirmed its prior determination and again
entered a final judgment in favor of appellee Mayson.  J.S. App.
83a-87a.

                          SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   The statutory provision at issue in this case, Section 702 of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-1, embodies Congress's
determination that its prohibition of religious discrimination in
employment should not be applied to the employment practices of
religious organizations.  The district court erred in concluding that
the Establishment Clause bars Congress from accommodating religion in
this manner and instead requires Congress to apply that prohibition
when a religious employer's hiring decisions relate to its secular
activities.

   This Court repeatedly has recognized government's authority to
lessen burdens on religious practice and thereby enhance the ability
of religious institutions and religious individuals to conduct
themselves in accordance with their beliefs.  While the Free Exercise
Clause obligates government to accommodate religion in some
circumstances, it does not exhaust the possibilities of permissible
governmental accommodation of religion.  Indeed, the Establishment
Clause itself is a guarantee of religious liberty, ensuring that
government will not interfere or become entangled with religion.

   Exemptions from obligations imposed by government upon the public
at large -- such as the tax exemptions available to religious
institutions -- constitute perhaps the most familiar type of
accommodation of religion.  By removing the church from the
interfering influence of the state, such exemptions typically further
the central goal of both of the Religion Clauses:  "to prevent, as far
as possible, the intrusion of either (the church or the state) into
the precincts of the other" (Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602, 614
(1971)).

   Section 702 closely resembles the exemptions of this sort
previously approved by this Court.  Congress concluded that the
application of the antidiscrimination rule to religious institutions
might well result in a conflict with religious belief.  It also
recognized that a narrower exemption would require government inquiry
into religious beliefs, government investigation of religious
activities, and difficult decisions regarding religious justifications
for religion-based hiring, and adopted a broad exemption that avoids
these entangling effects.  By seeking to prevent government
interference with religion, and selecting the legislative course most
likely to avoid such entanglement, Congress surely did not violate the
Establishment Clause.

   In addition, Section 702 does not result in the sort of affirmative
involvement of the state in religious activity that is forbidden by
the Establishment Clause.  Thus, Section 702 is neutral among
religious denominations, does not confer government power upon
religious organizations or convey a message of government endorsement
of religious organizations, does not provide government financial
support for religious activities, and does not authorize the use of
government power to coerce an individual's religious choice.

   The foregoing demonstrates that Section 702 satisfies the test
established by this Court in Lemon v. Kurtzman, supra.  Congress's
purpose of accommodating religious organizations comports with the
goal of avoiding interference of government with religion that lies at
the heart of the Religion Clauses, and is therefore entirely lawful.
Similarly, the sole effect of the statute, which is to accomplish that
accommodation, does not violate the Constitution.  Finally, Section
702 minimizes rather than aggravates the possibility of government
entanglement with religion.  The Lemon test therefore confirms that
Section 702 is a permissible accommodation of religion.

                               ARGUMENT

         SECTION 702 DOES NOT VIOLATE THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE

   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits an employer
from "discharg(ing) any individual * * * because of such individual's
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin" (42 U.S.C.
2000e-2(a)(1)).  Section 702 of the original Act partially exempted
religious organizations from this general rule, providing that the
antidiscrimination requirement does not apply to a religious
organization "with respect to the employment of individuals of a
particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by
such (organization) of its religious activities" (42 U.S.C. (1964 ed.)
2000e-1).

   Congress altered the religious organization exemption in 1972,
broadening it to apply to both the secular and the religious
activities of religious institutions.  See Pub. L. No. 92-261, Section
3, 86 Stat. 103 (1972).  Under the amended version of Section 702, a
religious organization is free to take religion into account in all of
its personnel decisions.  42 U.S.C. 2000e-1;  see S. Conf. Rep.
92-681, 92d Cong., 2d Sess. 16 (1972) (the amendment "expanded the
exemption for religious organizations from coverage (under Title VII)
with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion
in all their activities instead of the present limitation to religious
activities");  118 Cong. Rec. 7167 (1972) (section-by-section analysis
of bill reported by the conference committee).

   The legislative history reveals that Congress amended Section 702
in order to prevent government interference with religious
institutions.  /8/ Senator Ervin, one of the principal sponsors of the
amendment, observed that limitation of the exemption to a religious
organization's religious activities "would split the activities of a
religious organization into two segments, although they are
irretrievably held mainly by the organization itself," and permit
government oversight of the organization's employment decisions with
respect to employees who did not "work strictly in the religious
field" (118 Cong. Rec. 1977 (1972)).  He argued that "(w)hen the
Federal Government begins to grasp the power of things of the Lord, it
is reaching a state of governmental intemperance which is alien to the
first amendment" (ibid).  Senator Ervin concluded that Congress was
not "securing religious liberty from the invasion of the civil
authorities when (it) give(s) the civil authorities power to regulate
whom religious institutions * * * can employ, whom they must promote,
whom they must retain in employment, and whom they may fire." Id. at
1979;  see also id. at 946-949 (remarks of Sen. Allen).

   Senator Ervin also noted the problems that would be encountered in
attempting to distinguish a religious organization's religious
activities from the organization's secular activities.  He observed
that the limited religious institution exemption "attempt(ed) to do an
impossible thing, that is to separate the religious activities of a
religious (organization) * * * from those of its activities which can
be said to be not religious, nonreligious, or unreligious" (118 Cong.
Rec. 1973 (1972)).

       A. Section 702 Is A Permissible Accommodation Of Religion

   The question in the present case is whether Congress's decision to
expand Section 702 in order to prevent government intereference with
religious institutions constitutes an establishment of religion
violative of the First Amendment.  We do not assert that the amendment
of Section 702 to encompass all activities of religious institutions
was required by the Free Exercise Clause.  The statutory provision
does, however, further the values embodied in both the Free Exercise
and Establishment Clauses, and does not run afoul of the limitations
upon government action imposed by the Establishment Clause.  We
believe, therefore, that Section 702 is a valid exercise of the
government's discretionary authority to accommodate religious beliefs
and institutions.  /9/

 1. This Court Has made Clear That Government May Accommodate Religion
Through Exemptions From Generally Applicable Regulatory Standards

   The "first and most immediate purpose (of the Establishment Clause)
rested on the belief that a union of government and religion tends to
destroy government and to degrade religion.  * * * The Establishment
Clause thus stands as an expression of principle on the part of the
Founders of our Constitution that religion is too personal, too
sacred, too holy, to permit its 'unhallowed perversion' by a civil
magistrate.  Another purpose of the Establishment Clause rested upon
an awareness of the historical fact that governmentally established
religions and religious persecutions go hand in hand." Engel v.
Vitale, 370 U.S. 421, 431-432 (1962) (footnote omitted);  see also
Abington School District v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203, 221-223 (1963).

   "(F)or the men who wrote the Religion Clauses of the First
Amendment the 'establishment' of a religion connoted sponsorship,
financial support, and active involvement of the sovereign in
religious activity" (Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. at 668).  The
central goal of the Clauses, therefore, is "to prevent, as far as
possible, the intrusion of either (the church or the state) into the
precincts of the other." Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. at 614;  see also
Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. at 669 ("(t)he general principle
deducible from the First Amendment and all that has been said by this
Court is this:  that we will not tolerate either governmentally
established religion or governmental interference with religion").
Thus, the Establishment Clause no less than the Free Exercise Clause
may be seen as a guarantee of religious liberty:  the liberty of
religion to be free of meddling by the state and of individuals to be
free of the compulsion of state sponsored religion.  Accommodation to
religion in the form of an exemption from government regulation
plainly furthers these values, and therefore is most unlikely to
offend the Establishment Clause.

   a. The Court repeatedly has acknowledged that government may act to
lessen burdens upon religious practice and thereby enhance the ability
of religious institutions and religious individuals to conduct
themselves in accordance with their beliefs.  Thus, the Court has
observed that "the Constitution * * * affirmatively mandates
accommodation, not merely tolerance, of all religions, and forbids
hostility toward any." Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668, 673 (1984);
see also Wallace v. Jaffree, No. 83-812 (June 4, 1985), slip op. 1618
(O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment);  Thomas v. Review Board,
450 U.S. 707, 726-727 (1981) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).  "(T)he
interrelationship of the Religion Clauses has permitted government to
take religion into account * * * to exempt, when possible, from
generally applicable governmental regulation individuals whose
religious beliefs and practices would otherwise thereby be infringed,
or to create without state involvement an atmosphere in which
voluntary religious exercise may flourish." McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S.
618, 638-639 (1978) (Brennan, J., concurring) (footnotes omitted).

   This vigorous endorsement of government accommodation of religion
has its source in the significant role that religion has played in our
society since the founding of the Nation.  Our traditions encourage
government to act in a manner that enhances an individual's ability to
observe his faith.  Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. at 677-678 (citations
omitted) ("evidence of accommodation of all faiths and all forms of
religious expression" pervades our Nation's history;  "(t)hrough this
accommodation * * * governmental action has 'follow(ed) the best of
our traditions' and respect(ed) the religious nature of our people'");
 Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306, 313 (1952) ("(w)e are a religious
people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being");  McConnell,
Accommodation of Religion, 1985 Sup. Ct. Rev. 1, 14-24.

   Indeed, the impetus to government accommodation is rooted in the
Constitution itself:  the Free Exercise Clause embodies a special
solicitude for religious liberty, obligating the government to adjust
its policies in some circumstances so as to avoid interference with
religious institutions.  See, e.g., Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese
v. Milivojevich, 426 U.S. 696, 721-722 (1976);  Kedroff v. Saint
Nicholas Cathedral, 344 U.S. 94, 114-116 (1952);  cf. Wisconsin v.
Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972);  Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981);
NLRB v. Catholic Bishop, 440 U.S. 490 (1979).  Accommodation by
government of religious institutions, far from constituting a
forbidden establishment of religion, expresses a "benevolent
neutrality which will permit religious exercise to exist without
sponsorship and without interference" (Walz v. Tax Commission, 397
U.S. at 669).

   The Court has made clear, moreover, that the government's authority
to accommodate religion is not limited to the measures required by the
Free Exercise Clause:  "(t)he limits of permissible state
accommodation to religion are by no means co-extensive with the
noninterference mandated by the Free Exercise Clause.  To equate the
two would be to deny a national heritage with roots in the revolution
itself." Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. at 673;  see also Bowen v.
Roy, No. 84-780 (June 11, 1986), slip op. 18 & n.19 (opinion of
Burger, C.J.);  Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 16 (O'Connor, J.,
concurring in the judgment);  Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. 783, 812
(1983) (Brennan, J., dissenting);  TWA v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63, 90
(1977) (Marshall, J., dissenting);  Gillette v. United States, 401
U.S. 437, 453 (1971);  Welsh v. United States, 398 U.S. 333, 371-372
(1970) (White, J., dissenting);  McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U.S. 420,
520 (1961) (Frankfurter, J., concurring).

   b. The present case concerns the scope of the government's
discretionary authority to accommodate religious practice, which is
bounded on the bottom by the mandate of the Free Exercise Clause and
on the top by the prohibition contained in the Establishment Clause.
Since the question here is whether a particular sort of government
accommodation of religion -- a statute that exempts religious
individuals or institutions from an obligation imposed upon other
members of society -- exceeds the "ceiling" upon permissible
government action imposed by the Establishment Clause, it is necessary
to consider how the values embodied in the Establishment Clause relate
to an accommodation of this type.

   An exemption that excuses religious individuals or organizations
from a general obligation invariably will have the effect of reducing
government interference with religion because it eliminates a
government-imposed rule that may limit the ability of the individual
or organization to follow the tenets of religious faith.  By removing
the church from the interfering influence of the state, the exemption
furthers the purposes of the Establishment Clause -- to prevent
government entanglement with religion and foster religious liberty.
In addition, because the exemption reflects a government decision not
to involve itself with religion, explicit exemption is the form of
government acknowledgment of religion least likely to constitute
forbidden affirmative involvement of the state in religious activity.
/10/

   The striking congruence between the goals of the Religion Clauses
and the likely effects of religion-based exemptions from obligations
imposed by government upon the general public strongly supports the
constitutionality of such measures.  It is not surprising, therefore,
that the Court repeatedly has approved exemptions of this type.  Thus,
the religious accommodations required by the Free Exercise Clause
generally take the form of religion-based exemptions.  The Court has
expressly rejected the contention that such action violates the
Establishment Clause.  See, e.g., Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. at
234-235 n.22;  Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 409 (1963).

   The Court also has approved such exemptions without relying upon
the Free Exercise Clause, recognizing that the political branches have
discretion to adopt such exemptions without triggering the
prohibitions imposed by the Establishment Clause.  For example, in
Zorach v. Clauson, supra, the Court upheld a statute permitting the
release of a student from public school classes so that the student
could attend a religious center for religious instruction.  The Court
observed that "(w)hen the state encourages religious instruction or
cooperates with religious authorities by adjusting the schedule of
public events to sectarian needs, it follows the best of our
traditions," and held that the exemption on religious grounds from the
compulsory attendance requirement did not effect an establishment of
religion (343 U.S. at 313-314).

   Similarly, in Walz v. Tax Commission, supra, the Court rejected an
Establishment Clause challenge to a statute creating a property tax
exemption for property owned by religious organizations and used for
religious purposes.  The Court could not "read (the) statute as
attempting to establish religion;  it is simply sparing the exercise
of religion from the burden of property taxation levied on private
profit institutions." 397 U.S. at 673;  see also Bowen v. Roy, slip
op. 18 n.19 (opinion of Burger, C.J.) (indicating that although an
exemption from a social security law requirement was not mandated by
the Free Exercise Clause, such an exemption would not violate the
Establishment Clause);  United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252, 260 & n.11
(1982) (indicating approval of statute exempting religious objectors
from the obligation to pay social security taxes);  Gillette v. United
States, supra (upholding exemption from the military draft for
conscientious objectors);  Braunfeld v. Brown, 366 U.S. 599, 608
(1961) (plurality opinion) (indicating that Sabbatarian exception to
Sunday closing laws would be constitutionally permissible);  Selective
Draft Law Cases, 245 U.S. 366, 389-390 (1918) (upholding exemption
from the draft for religious objectors).  /11/

 2. Section 702 Minimizes Entanglement Between Government and Religion
And Effects No Sponsorship or Financial Assistance of Religion

   Section 702 fits squarely within these prior decisions.  By
exempting religious institutions from a governmentally-imposed burden,
it promotes the values embodied in the Religion Clauses.  Moreover,
Section 702 has none of the effects that this Court has cited in
striking down government action under the Establishment Clause.
Section 702 therefore is plainly constitutional.  /12/

   a. As we have discussed (see pages 18-21), the central purpose of
the Religion Clauses is to ensure noninterference by government in
religion.  The Court in Walz v. Tax Commission, supra, upheld the
property tax exemption at issue in that case after finding that the
exemption (1) "spar(ed) the exercise of religion from the burden of
property taxation," thereby eliminating any danger of oppressive
government action stemming from hostility to religion, and (2)
lessened government entanglement with religion.  397 U.S. at 673,
674-675;  see also Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 17 (O'Connor, J.,
concurring in the judgment) (defining an accommodation of religion as
a government action that "lifts a government-imposed burden on the
free exercise of religion");  Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. at 804
(Brennan, J., dissenting) (footnote omitted) (improper government
interference with religion may result if government "unduly involv(es)
itself in the supervision of religious institutions or officials").
The goal of noninterference of government in religion plainly is
furthered by Section 702.

   As a threshold matter, Congress's judgment that Section 702
furthers the goal of noninterference of government in religion is
entitled to deference.  Cf. Walters v. National Association of
Radiation Survivors, 473 U.S. 305, 322-323 (1985);  Gillette v.United
States, 401 U.S. at 460.  A court should not lightly overturn
Congress's conclusions -- based upon its assessment of the relevant
interests -- that its program for combatting religious discrimination
in employment should be adjusted to avoid government interference in
religion, and that a broad prophylactic exemption is the appropriate
means by which to reduce the potential for interference with this
aspect of religious organizations' employment decisions.  Indeed,
where Congress has made a judgment that the government interest
underlying a regulatory program does not justify the extension of the
regulation to religious organizations, there would appear to be little
reason for a court to insist upon the expansion of the regulatory
program, thereby triggering government interference with religion that
Congress deemed wholly unnecessary to fulfill its underlying purposes.

   Moreover, an assessment of the relevant interests indicates that
Congress correctly concluded that Section 702 furthers the values of
the Religion Clauses by eliminating a source of government
interference with religion.  The Free Exercise Clause undoubtedly
requires government to permit religious organizations to consider
religion in connection with some of their employment decisions:
clergymen plainly may be hired on the basis of religion.  And a
religious organization's employment decisions frequently may be based
upon religious belief even if the tasks to be performed by a
prospective employee seem wholly secular to an outsider.  For example,
the organization's religious tenets may impose an obligation to assist
members of its own faith in finding employment.  In addition, a
religious organization plainly has an associational interest in
maintaining its cohesiveness;  it may wish to serve that interest by
limiting employment to coreligionists.  A rule barring a religious
organization from taking religion into account in employment decisions
therefore is likely to burden the ability of the organization to
conduct its affairs in accordance with the dictates of its faith and
its religious identity and mission.

   In the present case, the Church personnel policy that led to the
discharge of appellee Mayson rests in part on these considerations
(see pages 5-6, supra).  Indeed, to the extent that the Church's
policy is dictated by its religious beliefs, a rule barring the Church
from hiring on the basis of religion would implicate the Free Exercise
Clause.  Section 702 thus promotes religious autonomy, avoids the need
for difficult inquiries under the Free Exercise Clause, and eliminates
possible government interference with religion by exempting religious
institutions from a government regulation that would override their
desire to act pursuant to their beliefs.  /13/

   Limiting the exemption to "religious" activities -- the rule
adopted by the district court -- would interfere with religion by
discouraging a religious organization from taking religion into
account in employment decisions for jobs which outsiders might view as
"secular".  The fundamental difficulty with such a rule, which is well
illustrated by this case, flows from the uncertainty of the line
between religious and secular activities.  Thus, the district court
concluded that the Church's Welfare Services Department constitutes a
religious activity (J.S. App. 116a), but found that the manufacture of
sacred garments worn by Church members in religious ceremonies might
not be a religious activity (id. at 18a-19a, 93a-105a).  It is hard to
see any clear distinction between these two activities, each of which
implicates the Church's religious tenets, but the district court found
that disputed facts precluded a finding as to the status of garment
manufacturing.

   In order to apply an exemption limited to religious activities,
moreover, the government would be required to conduct an inquiry into
the organization's religious beliefs and examine the characteristics
of the activity implicated by each claim of religious discrimination.
Second-guessing of a religious organization's view of the dictates of
its own religion, government investigation of religious activities,
and "the direct confrontation and conflicts that follow in the train
of those legal processes" all constitute government interference with
religion that Congress could legitimately seek to avoid.  Walz v. Tax
Commission, 397 U.S. at 674;  id. at 691 (Brennan, J., concurring);
see also Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. at 269-270 n.6 (government
inquiry "into the significance of words and practices to different
religious faiths" would "tend inevitably to entangle the State with
religion in a manner forbidden by (this Court's) cases").  /14/

   An exemption limited to "religious" activities would also mean that
religious organizations act at their peril in making religion-based
employment decisions.  They could never be certain whether the
particular activity would subsequently be found to be "religious"
rather than "secular." The possibility of liability under Title VII
might make a religious organization reluctant to consider religion in
its employment decisions even where that approach would later be found
wholly permissible on the ground that the activity was in fact
religious.

   In upholding the tax exemption in Walz v. Tax Commission, supra,
the court observed that "(e)ither course, taxation of churches or
exemption, occasions some degree of involvement with religion" (397
U.S. at 674), and noted with approval that the exemption resulted in a
lesser degree of entanglement between government and religion.  397
U.S. at 674-75;  see also Gillette v. United States, 401 U.S. at
457-458.  Here, Congress decided that religious institutions'
employment decisions should be governed by the rule that is most
likely to avoid government interference with religion.  Indeed, its
decision pretermits the difficult inquiries that would be necessary
under a narrower rule.  Section 702 therefore furthers the
noninterference of government in religion that is the purpose of the
Religion Clauses.  /15/

   b. Moreover, Section 702 does not amount to "'sponsorship,
financial support, and active involvement of the sovereign in
religious activity'" that is forbidden by the Establishment Clause.
Committee for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist, 413
U.S. 756, 772 (1973) (citation omitted);  see also School District v.
Ball, No. 83-900 (July 1, 1985), slip op. 7.  /16/

   First, Section 702 is neutral among religions.  "The clearest
command of the Establishment Clause," this Court has stated, "is that
one religious denomination cannot be officially preferred over
another." Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S. 228, 244 (1982);  see Gillette
v. United States, 401 U.S. at 449.  One important aspect of neutrality
is that the government not "confer any imprimatur of state approval on
any religious sects or practices." Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. at 274.
 Thus, a governmental accommodation to religion might be invalid if it
discriminated among religions or if it amounted to an endorsement of a
particular religion.

   The exemption contained in Section 702 does not breach this
requirement because it is available to all religious organizations;
the statute makes no distinction on the basis of belief.  Although the
provision does treat religious organizations differently from other
organizations, that fact alone cannot amount to prohibited government
sponsorship of religion.  All accommodations of religion would
otherwise be barred by the Establishment Clause and the special
solicitude for religion expressed by the Free Exercise Clause would
itself constitute a constitutional anomaly.  The well-settled
principle of accommodation of religion (see pages 20-25, supra)
therefore makes clear that a distinction of this type does not offend
the Establishment Clause.  /17/

   Second, Section 702 does not promote the "symbolic union of church
and state" (School District v. Ball, slip op. 16), or make "adherence
to a religion relevant in any way to a person's standing in the
political community" (Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. at 687 (O'Connor,
J., concurring)).  In Larkin v. Grendel's Den, 459 U.S. 116 (1982),
for example, the Court held that a statute giving churches the power
to bar the issuance of liquor licenses to establishments located near
them violated the Establishment Clause because it "enmesh(ed) churches
in the exercise of substantial governmental powers." 459 U.S. at 126;
see also School District v. Ball, slip op. 16 (if the government
action "conveys a message of government endorsement or disapproval, a
core purpose of the Establishment Clause is violated").  Section 702
neither permits religious organizations to exercise governmental
authority nor confers upon government the authority to regulate
religious organizations;  and the exemption does not convey a message
of government endorsement of religion.  Far from symbolizing the union
of church and state, it reinforces the noninterference of one in the
other that is at the heart of the Religion Clauses.

   Third, Section 702 does not result in government financial support
of religious activities.  See School District v. Ball, slip op. 11-12.
 The district court suggested (J.S. App. 69a-70a). that Section 702's
exemption for secular activities would enable religious organizations
to expand their business interests, but failed to offer any
explanation for that conclusion.  The district court did not expressly
find that the exemption provides religious employers with any
financial advantage over secular competitors and nothing in its
opinion -- or in the record in this case -- supports that conclusion.
/18/ Indeed, the limited scope of the exemption weighs against a
finding of financial advantage.  Religious organizations remain
subject to Title VII's prohibition against discrimination based on
race, color, national origin and sex and are required -- like all
other covered employers -- to report the race, color, national origin
and sex of their employees to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (29 C.F.R. 1602.7).  /19/

   Even if the district court had identified some incidental financial
benefit resulting from Section 702, moreover, that fact would not
render the exemption violative of the Establishment Clause.  This
Court has rejected claims that incidental financial benefits caused by
an exemption from a generally applicable government burden
automatically render the exemption invalid.  Thus, the tax exemption
approved in Walz v. Tax Commission, supra, plainly conferred a far
greater financial benefit than religious organizations could secure as
a result of the narrow exemption permitted by Section 702.  Yet the
Court in that case rejected the argument that the tax exemption
afforded impermissible financial assistance to religion.  397 U.S. at
675;  see also;  Mueller v. Allen, 463 U.S. 388 (1983) (tuition tax
deductions);  St. Martin Evangelical Lutheran Church v. South Dakota,
451 U.S. 772 (1981) (exemption of church-operated schools from
unemployment taxes);  cf. Witters v. Washington Department of Services
for the Blind, No. 84-1070 (Jan. 27, 1986) (extension of aid pursuant
to state vocational rehabilitation program to finance petitioner's
theological training at a Christian college).  The same reasoning
requires the rejection of the argument that Section 702 is
unconstitutional because if confers a financial benefit upon religious
organizations.

   Fourth, Section 702 does not authorize the use of government power
to coerce an individual's religious choice.  The goal of the Religion
Clauses is to enable each individual to adopt and practice the
religion of his choice -- or no religion at all -- without
interference by the government.  Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 11-16;
Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 714-715 (1977);  Marsh v. Chambers,
463 U.S. at 803 (Brennan, J., dissenting).  Section 702 does not
enable a religious organization to invoke the authority of government
to compel adherence to religious requirements.  Section 702 instead is
a restriction on the use of government power;  government has
withdrawn and permitted a religious organization to determine
according to the dictates of its faith whether to consider religion in
employment decisions.

   The district court observed (J.S. App. 70a, 72a-73a) that Section
702 permits a religious organization to use employment opportunities
to require adherence to its religious beliefs, and found that effect
to be constitutionally impermissible.  Of course, the religious
organization's ability to coerce its employees is limited.  An
individual can choose to seek other employment rather than satisfy a
religious requirement.  /20/

   More fundamentally, the particular effect cited by the district
court -- the fact that a religious organization may influence its
employees' religious choices by discriminating in employment on the
basis of religion -- is not an effect that is relevant under the
Establishment Clause because it is not the result of an affirmative
grant of authority by Section 702 or any other federal statute.  Prior
to the enactment of Title VII, all private employers were free to
discriminate on the basis of religion;  Section 702 simply exempts
religious organizations from the antidiscrimination requirement of
Title VII.  /21/ The effect cited by the district court thus flows
from the government's decision not to exercise its regulatory
authority.  Since Congress's failure to prohibit discrimination prior
to 1964 did not constitute an establishment of religion, its decision
not to prohibit such discrimination now cannot offend the
Establishment Clause.

   Indeed, the district court's conclusion rests upon reasoning
similar to an argument rejected by this Court in Walz v. Tax
Commission, supra.  The tax exemption in Walz was attacked as the
equivalent of a direct money subsidy to religious organizations;  the
Court replied that "(t)he grant of a tax exemption is not sponsorship
since the government does not transfer part of its revenue to churches
but simply abstains from demanding that the church support the state.
No one has ever suggested that tax exemption has converted libraries,
art galleries, or hospitals into arms of the state or put employees on
the public payroll.'" 397 U.S. at 675;  see also id. at 690 (Brennan,
J., concurring) (distinguishing subsidies from exemptions on the
ground that "(a) subsidy involves the direct transfer of public
monies" while an exemption acts "only passively, by relieving a
privately funded venture of the burden of paying taxes").  So, too,
here the absence of government regulation must be distinguished from
the affirmative invocation of government power.  Since Section 702
constitutes the former rather than the latter, it does not violate the
Establishment Clause.  /22/

   Claims under the Establishment Clause generally require the Court
to "reconcile the inescapable tension between the objective of
preventing unnecessary intrusion of either the church or the state
upon the other, and the reality that * * * total separation of the two
is not possible" (Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. at 672).  Here, however,
there is no "inescapable tension" to resolve.  The sole effect of
Section 702 is to promote the disassociation of government and
religion that is the goal of the Religion Clauses.  The statute
therefore cannot violate the Constitution.  /23/

 B. Section 702 Therefore Satisfies The Test Set Forth In Lemon v.
Kurtzman

   In Lemon v. Kurtzman, supra, this Court set forth a three-part
standard for evaluating claims under the Establishment Clause:
"First, the statute must have a secular legislative purpose;  second,
its principal or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor
inhibits religion;  finally, the statute must not foster 'an excessive
government entanglement with religion'" (403 U.S. at 612-613
(citations omitted)).  While we have in the past indicated uneasiness
with the Lemon standard as applied to government accommodations of
religion, /24/ it is clear that Section 702 satisfies each of these
requirements.

   First, Section 702 serves a permissible legislative purpose.  As we
have discussed (see pages 15-17), Congress enacted the exemption in
order to avoid government interference with the personnel decisions of
religious organizations, thereby furthering religious autonomy.  As
the district court in this case noted, the "legislative goal of
assuring that the government remains neutral and does not meddle in
religious affairs by interfering with the decision-making process in
religions is a valid secular purpose" (J.S. App. 40a).  /25/

   Although the Court has not expressly stated that a statute designed
to accommodate religion has a purpose that is permissible under Lemon,
it has strongly indicated that such a purpose does not violate the
Establishment Clause.  Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. at 234-235 n.22;
Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. at 673-674;  cf. Ansonia Board of
Education v. Philborrk, No. 85-495 (Nov. 17, 1986).  While a narrow
reading of the secular purpose requirement might be taken to
invalidate any exemption of religious observers from generally
applicable governmental obligations, given the underlying purpose to
promote the exercise of religion free from government interference
(see Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 16 (O'Connor, J., concurring
opinion)), such a conclusion would defeat the central aim of the
Religion Clauses.  The Establishment Clause itself seeks, most
fundamentally, to avoid the interference of government with religion,
and this Court's decisions make quite clear that a statute designed to
avoid interaction of government and religion furthers that goal.  See
pages 18-25, supra.  The Lemon test should be construed to reflect the
permissibility of such a legislative purpose.  /26/

   Similarly, as to the second prong of the Lemon test, the principal
effect of Section 702 is to eliminate government interference with
religious organizations by excluding them from coverage under
regulatory legislation.  In particular, the exclusion from Title VII
coverage of all employment decisions of religious entities that are
based on the employee's religion avoids substantial litigation,
frequently culminating in the substitution of a court or agency
judgment for that of a church, on a subject often significantly
related to religious belief and practice.  See pages 26-31, supra.
That effect must be permissible if the Establishment Clause is not to
defeat its own purpose of avoiding entanglement and interference with
religion.

   Finally, Section 702 does not contravene the third part of the
Lemon standard because it avoids rather than causes an entanglement of
government and religion.  The Court observed in Lemon that "(i)n order
to determine whether the government entanglement with religion is
excessive, we must examine the character and purposes of the
institutions that are benefited, the nature of the aid that the State
provides, and the resulting relationship between the government and
the religious authority" (403 U.S. at 615).

   Although Section 702 arguably benefits religious institutions by
freeing them from a legal restriction on their conduct, that fact
cannot be dispositive of the entanglement inquiry without invalidating
all accommodations of religion.  Moreover, the statutory exemption
provides no affirmative aid to religious organizations, but simply
reflects government's decision not to regulate one aspect of their
activities.  Such forbearance minimizes the interaction between
government and religion, and thus avoids rather than exacerbates any
possible entanglement.  As the district court concluded, "Section 702
does not require the type of comprehensive, discriminatory and
continuous state or federal surveillance that was condemned in cases
such as Lemon.  * * * (It) ensure(s) that the government and courts do
not go through the rigors of inspecting and analyzing whether the
activities in which a religious entity is engaging are religious or
secular, thus avoiding an intimate and continuing relationship between
church and state" (J.S. App. 74a-75a (footnote omitted)).  /27/

                              CONCLUSION

   The judgment of the district court should be reversed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   WM. BRADFORD REYNOLDS

      Assistant Attorney General

   DONALD B. AYER

      Deputy Solicitor General

   MICHAEL CARVIN

      Deputy Assistant Attorney General

   ANDREW J. PINCUS

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   IRVING GORNSTEIN

   WILLIAM R. YEOMANS

      Attorneys

   JANUARY 1987

   /1/ "J.S. App." refers to the appendix to the jurisdictional
statement filed by the private appellants, Corporation of the
Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v.
Amos, No. 86-179.

   /2/ The CPB and the COP are corporations organized under Utah law
(J.S. App. 2a-3a).  They are under the direct control of the Church's
religious leaders.  See Affidavit of Dallin H. Oaks, dated April 12,
1985, at 2-3;  Affidavit of J. Richard Clarke, Dated April 12, 1985,
at 2-3.

   /3/ There have been isolated exceptions to this policy in
connection with gymnasium employees, such as one occasion on which a
Church member could not be found with the requisite skills.
Supplemental Answers to Plaintiffs' Third Set of Interrogatories at
18;  see also Affidavit of Robert Borchert, dated April 12, 1985, at 2
(non-Church member hired and subsequently discharged).  As of June
1983, all gymnasium employees were Church members who "have complied
or are complying with Church employment eligibility policies" (Heaps
Affidavit at 3).

   /4/ The Church apparently does not apply this employment policy to
the profit-making, tax-paying entities that it controls.  Affidavit of
Wayne Nelson, dated April 12, 1985, at 3.

   /5/ The complaint was styled as a class action, but the district
court did not certify a class.  The other individual plaintiffs
included appellees Christine J. Amos, Judy L. Bawden, Deniece Kanon,
April Joyce Riding, Ruth Arriola, and Shelleen Adamson, who were
employed as seamstresses at Beehive Clothing Mills, a Church owned and
operated establishment that namufactures sacred garments worn by
Church members in religious ceremonies.  Each of these individuals was
discharged after she failed to satisfy the requirements for a temple
recommend.  J.S. App. 3a-4a.  The district court did not resolve these
appellees' claims because it found that disputed issues of fact
precluded a determination on motion for summary judgment regarding
whether Beehive constitutes a religious or a secular activity (id. at
18a-19a, 93a-105a).

   Appellee Ralph Whitaker was employed by Deseret Industries, a
division of the Church's Welfare Services Department, and also lost
his job because he failed to obtain a temple recommend (J.S. App.
105a-107a).  The district court concluded that "Deseret Industries is
a religious activity as there is an intimate connection between
Industries and the defendants and the Mormon Church and between the
primary function of Industries and the religious tenets of the Church"
(id. at 116a).  The court granted summary judgment in favor of the COP
and the CPB with respect to appellee Whitaker's claim, holding that
religious activities conducted by religious organizations are exempt
from Title VII's prohibition against discrimination on the basis of
religion (id. at 105a).  Appellee Whitaker has not sought review of
that determination.

   /6/ The statute bars an employer from "discharg(ing) any individual
* * * because of such individual's * * * religion" (42 U.S.C.
2000e-2(a)(1)).  The plaintiffs also argued that the discharges
violated the parallel provision of the Utah antidiscrimination
statute, Utah Code Ann. Section 34-35-6(1) (Supp. 1986).

   /7/ The court indicated that its "determination regarding (Section
702) applies with equal force to the (parallel) state law exemption as
it relates to the facts of this case" (J.S. App. 8a).  It declined to
address appellees' arguments that the application of Section 702 to
secular activities violates the due process and equal protection
principles embodied in the Fifth Amendment (J.S. App. 76a), and it
dismissed appellees' state law claims for wrongful discharge and
intentional infliction of emotional distress (id. at 77a-82a).

   /8/ The Senate debated several proposals concerning the religious
institution exemption, including an amendment that would have exempted
religious organizations from all of the antidiscrimination
requirements of Title VII.  Some of the comments discussed in the text
are taken from the debate on these broader proposals.  Senators Ervin
and Allen sponsored both the broader and the narrower measures, and
their comments therefore are relevant in ascertaining the purpose of
the exemption that was adopted by Congress.

   /9/ In its November 3, 1986 order in these cases, the Court
postponed further consideration of the question of jurisdiction to the
hearing of the cases on the merits.  The district court initially
entered judgment in favor of appellee Mayson on January 22, 1986, but
that order was vacated on February 4, 1986, pursuant to a timely
motion for reconsideration filed by the private appelless under Fed.
R. Civ. P. 59.  We moved to intervene as of right pursuant to Fed. R.
Civ. P. 24(a) and 28 U.S.C. 2403 on March 7, 1986, and the district
court granted our motion on March 19, 1986;  we filed a brief and
presented oral argument in support of the constitutionality of Section
702;  and the district court issued an order on May 16, 1986
"reaffirming and re-entering" its prior judgment in favor of appellee
Mayson.  See J.S. App. 83a-87a.

   In our view, 28 U.S.C. 1252 plainly supplies jurisdiction over
these appeals.  That statute provides that "(a)ny party may appeal to
the Supreme Court from an interlocutory or final judgment, decree or
order of any court of the United States * * * holding an Act of
Congress unconstitutional in any civil action * * * to which the
United States * * * is a party." All of these statutory requirements
are satisfied in the present case.  First, the United States became a
party to this action prior to the issuance of the order on appeal
holding Section 702 unconstitutional.  It is settled that intervention
by the United States satisfies the statutory requirement that the
United States by a "party" to the action.  See ILGWU v. Donnelly
Garment Co., 304 U.S. 243, 249 (1938).  Second, the fact that the
district court issued a prior order has no effect upon the
appealability of the second, effective order.  The initial order was
vacated pursuant to a timely motion for reconsideration and therefore
is a nullity.  Moreover, the fact that the district relied on its
prior order cannot prevent review of the judgment of
unconstitutionality that is the basis for its second order.  Cf.
United States v. Clark, 445 U.S. 23, 25-27 n.2 (1980).  Third, this
case qualifies as a "civil action";  it was commenced by appellees
pursuant to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e
et seq.  Fourth, the district court held an Act of Congress
unconstitutional.  It expressly declared Section 702 unconstitutional
on its face to the extent the statute exempts the secular activities
of religious organizations from Title VII's nondiscrimination mandate
(see J.S. App. 75a).  This holding was necessary to the court's award
of relief to appellee Mayson.  (Even had the district court held
Section 702 unconstitutional as applied to appellee Mayson, this Court
would have jurisdiction under Section 1252.  See Bolger v. Youngs Drug
Products Corp., 463 U.S. 60 (1983);  California v. Grace Brethren
Church, 457 U.S. 393, 405 (1982).) Finally, the statute permits "any
party" to appeal, and both the United States and the private
defendants have appealed to this Court.  For these reasons, the Court
plainly has appellate jurisdiction over the district court's judgment
in this case.

   /10/ Appelless assert (Mot. to Aff. 19) that this Court frequently
has "invalidated or denied" exemptions drawn on religious lines.  They
attempt to support this position by citing decisions of this Court
holding that -- in the particular circumstances of each case -- the
Free Exercise Clause did not require the adoption of a religion-based
exemption.  E.g., Bowen v. Roy, No. 84-780 (June 11, 1986);  Goldman
v. Weinberger, No. 84-1097 (Mar. 25, 1986);  Tony & Susan Alamo
Foundation v. Secretary of Labor, 471 U.S. 290 (1985);  United States
v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252 (1982).  But Congress did adopt such an exemption
when it enacted Section 702, and this case therefore presents a
different question -- whether the Establishment Clause prohibits such
an accommodation.  Since the Court has made clear that Congress's
authority to accommodate religion is not limited to those measures
required by the Free Exercise Clause, the decisions cited by appellees
interpreting the Free Exercise Clause are obviously beside the point.

   Welsh v. United States, 398 U.S. 333 (1970), another case cited by
appellees to support their claim that religion-based exemptions
generally violate the Constitution, plainly does not stand for that
proposition.  A plurality of four Justices decided the case on
statutory grounds, concluding that Congress intended to exempt from
the draft persons who object to military service on grounds of public
policy as well as persons who object on religious grounds (398 U.S. at
335-344).  Only Justice Harlan concluded that an exemption limited to
persons who opposed military service on the basis of their religious
beliefs would violate the Establishment Clause (id. at 356-361).
Three Justices rejected this view of the constitutional issue,
concluding that such an exemption would not effect an establishment of
religion (id. at 369-374 (White, J., dissenting)).

   /11/ NLRB v. Catholic Bishop, 440 U.S. 490 (1979), concerned the
authority of the National Labor Relations Board over teachers employed
in church-operated schools.  The Court construed the National Labor
Relations Act to exclude coverage of such teachers on the ground that
a contrary result would require the Court "to resolve difficult and
sensitive questions arising out of the guarantees of the First
Amendment Religion Clauses" (440 U.S. at 507).  Thus, the Court
expressly recognized an exemption for religious institutions from a
generally applicable regulatory requirement.  See also St. Martin
Evangelical Lutheran Church v. South Dakota, 451 U.S. 772 (1981)
(church-run schools exempted from mandatory coverage under Federal
Unemployment Tax Act).

   /12/ We note that Congress and the Executive Branch have adopted
other religion-based exemptions similar to Section 702.  See e.g., 26
U.S.C. 512(b)(12) and (15);  26 U.S.C. 3309(b);  26 U.S.C.
6033(a)(2)(A);  29 C.F.R. 779.214.

   /13/ Appelless suggest (Mot. to Aff. 14-15, 21) that the government
cannot assert a legitimate interest in avoiding this sort of
entanglement with religion because Congress has not created similar
exemptions in other contexts.  The district court observed (J.S. App.
45a-52a) that courts already examine the employment practices of
religious institutions in connection with Title VII's prohibition
against discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin
and sex.

   There is no basis for the claim that Congress's decision not to
adopt a broad exemption vitiates the justification for the more
tailored exemption that it chose to enact.  Indeed, Congress's
determination was entirely reasonable because, as the district court
acknowledged (J.S. App. 51a), it is more probable that employment
decisions based upon religion would be tied to the tenets of the
religious organization, and claims of religious discrimination are
more likely to require government review of religious beliefs,
especially where the permissibility of such discrimination turns upon
distinguishing between religious and secular activities.  Congress was
free to enact the limited exemption contained in Section 702 in order
to eliminate the most likely source of intrusion upon religious
beliefs.

   /14/ Such assessments of the religious character of various
activities would be conducted not only by courts, but at various
levels within the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, through its
broad authority to investigate discrimination complaints (see EEOC v.
Shell Oil Co., 466 U.S. 54 (1984)).

   /15/ Our discussion of the burdens upon religious organizations
that would result from the elimination or narrowing of Section 702
should not be taken to indicate that we believe that these burdens are
sufficient to implicate the Free Exercise Clause in every case.  That
inquiry, of course, turns upon whether the government action prevents
an individual or organization from practicing its religion.  See
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. at 215-219.  This Court's recognition of
government's authority to accommodate religion where accommodation is
not required by the Free Exercise Clause makes clear that government
may act to avoid interference with religion that falls short of a
violation of the Free Exercise Clause.  There is no reason to construe
the Constitution to prevent Congress from obviating Free Exercise
Clause inquiry in a class of cases when it deems government intrusion
unnecessary.

   /16/ It is noteworthy that even if Section 702 were limited to
religious activities -- an exemption that the district court found to
be constitutional -- its effects would be the same as Section 702 in
its present form, and would differ only in the number of jobs
affected.  It is difficult to believe that this difference in degree
dictates a different outcome of the Establishment Clause analysis,
because "(t)he crucial question is not whether some benefit accrues to
a religious institution as a consequence of the legislative program,
but whether its principal or primary effect advances religion" (Tilton
v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 672, 679 (1971) (plurality opinion)).  See
also note 22, infra.

   /17/ The district court indicated (J.S. App. 61a, 66a-67a) that
Section 702 violated the Constitution because the exemption does not
extend to "a broad spectrum of groups," but is "'limited to religious
institutions'" and because Section 702 is not supported by an
"historical tradition." The Court in Walz did cite these factors in
upholding the tax exemption at issue in that case (see 397 U.S. at
673, 675-678).  However, it is difficult to see how those factors
could be controlling because they have not been present in other cases
in which this Court has indicated that a discretionary accommodation
of religion would not violate the Establishment Clause.  See pages
24-25, supra.

   Moreover, similar factors are present here.  Title VII contains a
variety of exemptions designed to serve various public policies.  See,
e.g., 42 U.S.C. 2000e(b) (exemption for employers with less than 15
employees);  42 U.S.C. 2000e(f) (exemption for staffs of public
officials).  Thus, as with the tax exemption considered in Walz,
religious organizations are not alone in being accorded special
treatment.  And, although government regulation of discrimination in
private employment is of a relatively recent vintage, Congress
recognized the propriety of some form of exemption for religious
organizations as soon as it adopted a prohibition against religious
discrimination.  That exemption plainly is justified by the same fear
of retaliation against religion that the Court cited in Walz (see 397
U.S. at 674).  The authority to investigate a religious organization
and override an organization's personnel decisions obviously could be
applied by hostile plaintiffs -- or a government agency -- in a manner
that disrupts the religious organization.

   /18/ Appellees have attempted (Mot. to Aff. 17, 25-26) to support
the district court's intimation that Section 702 confers a financial
benefit on religious organizations by arguing that the Church's
tithing obligation -- enforced through the threat of discharge from
employment -- produces an economic benefit to the Church.  But the
district court did not refer to tithing and nothing in the record
indicates the extent of the Church's financial gain from tithing,
whether the Church lawfully could accomplish the same result by
reducing salaries paid to Church members, and whether any financial
gain outweighs the losses suffered as a result of the limitation of
the labor pool to those individuals who are willing to tithe and obey
all other Church requirements necessary to obtain a temple recommend.

   More fundamentally, however, the constitutionality of Section 702
should not turn on the practices or belief of a particular religious
group.  Such a result would require courts, with very little guidance,
to make myriad decisions not only whether a particular activity was
sufficiently religious to merit exemption from Title VII's ban against
religious discrimination, but also to evaluate particular religious
practices.  In addition, Section 702 then might be found
constitutional as applied to some religious groups and
unconstitutional as to others, potentially implicating the
Establishment Clause's command of neutrality among religions (see page
32, supra).

   /19/ No employer, religious or secular, is required to report the
religion of its employees.

   /20/ The statute in Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc., 472 U.S.
703 (1985), was found to violate the Establishment Clause because it
had the primary effect of "advanc(ing) a particular religious
practice" (472 U.S. at 710) -- Sabbath observance -- and forced
private individuals to accommodate this religious practice without
regard to the burden imposed upon those private individuals.  The
statute required "(t)he employer and others (to) adjust their affairs
to the command of the state" and violated the principle that no
individual has "'the right to insist that in pursuit of their own
interests others must conform their conduct to his own religious
necessities.'" Ibid. (citation omitted);  see also id. at 708
("Government * * * must take pains not to compel people to act in the
name of any religion".).  Section 702, by contrast, does not endorse
any specific religious practice and does not compel any private
individual to conform his conduct to religious requirements.  It thus
mandates separation between government and religion rather than
government intervention with respect to religious concerns.

   /21/ The fact that Congress enacted a narrower exemption in 1964
and adopted the broader exemption in 1972 does not alter this
analysis.  Cf. Crawford v. Los Angeles Board of Education, 458 U.S.
527 (1982).

   /22/ Rather than stating an effect cognizable under the
Establishment Clause, appellees' argument on this point resembles an
effort to invoke equal protection principles.  Thus, appellees argue
(Mot. to Aff. 18) that Congress was not free to draw a distinction
between religious employers and other employers.  Such a claim
relating to Congress's authority to distinguish among groups is more
properly addressed under equal protection principles.  As we have
shown, accommodation of religion is a permissible, indeed a
constitutionally sanctioned goal, and a distinction that furthers that
goal cannot constitute a denial of equal protection.  Since Section
702 effects just such an accommodation (see pages 26-31, supra), the
statute does not contravene equal protection principles.

   /23/ Justice O'Connor has suggested that "(i)n assessing the effect
of (a statute that lifts a government-imposed burden upon the free
exercise of religion) -- that is, in determining whether the statute
conveys (to an objective observer) the message of endorsement of
religion or a particular religious belief -- courts should assume that
the 'objective observer' is acquainted with the Free Exercise Clause
and the values it promotes" (Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 17
(concurring opinion)).  Section 702 plainly does not have an
impermissible effect under this standard.  An objective observer would
view the statute as an effort to disassociate government and religion
and thereby eliminate any possible burden upon a religious
organization's ability to act in accordance with the dictates of its
faith and its religious identity and mission.

   /24/ See, e.g., U.S. Br. at 24-30, Estate of Thornton v. Caldor,
Inc., supra.

   /25/ Appelless content (Mot. to Aff. 10-11) that congress's purpose
was not to avoid interference in religious affairs because on that
rationale it would have completely exempted religious organizations
from Title VII;  they assert that Congress intended to "invite()
religious employers to coerce religious loyalty through the economic
power that employment gives an employer over an employee." As we have
discussed (see note 13), Congress could reasonably conclude that its
goal of restricting interference in religion could be met by an
exemption limited to claims of religious discrimination.  Moreover, as
the district court found, "there is no indication that Congress
amended Section 702 for a religious purpose or to promote religion or
religious beliefs" (J.S. App. 40a (footnote omitted)).

   /26/ A narrow definition of the purposes permissible under the
Lemon test would tend to the absurd result that an accommodation of
religion required by the Free Exercise Clause automatically would run
afoul of the Establishment Clause because, by definition, the purpose
of such an accommodation, is to facilitate the free exercise of
religion.  In addition to producing such a constitutional impasse,
rejection of accommodation as a permissible goal would conflict with
this Court's decisions upholding discretionary accommodations of
religion (see pages 24-25, supra).

   /27/ The district court found that Section 702 enables religious
organizations to exercise "coercive power" over their employees'
beliefs and that this conclusion supported a "finding of excessive
entanglement" (J.S. App. 74a).  As we have discussed, the district
court's assessment of the effect of the statute is in error.

   We take no position regarding the question presented by the private
appellants regarding the availability of a back pay remedy in the
circumstances of this case.
