
   UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, APPELLANT V. CHRISTINE J. AMOS, ET AL.

   No. 86-401

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1986

   On Appeal From The United States District Court For The District Of
Utah

   Jurisdictional Statement

                       PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING

   The parties to this proceeding are identified in the jurisdictional
statement filed by the private defendants in this case, Corporation of
the Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints v. Amos, No. 86-179, at page ii.

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Constitutional and statutory provisions involved
   Statement
   The question is substantial
   Conclusion
   Appendix

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The order and final judgment of the district court (J.S. App.
83a-87a) is unreported.  /1/ The prior opinion of the district court
granting in part appellees' motion for summary judgment (J.S. App.
88a-122a) is reported at 618 F. Supp. 1013.  The prior opinion of the
district court denying the private appellants' motion to dismiss (J.S.
App. 1a-82a) is reported at 594 F. Supp. 791.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the district court was entered on May 16, 1986.
The United States filed a notice of appeal to this Court on June 13,
1986 (App., infra, 1a-2a).  On August 6, 1986, Justice White issued an
order extending the time within which to docket this appeal to and
including September 11, 1986.  The jurisdiction of this Court rests
upon 28 U.S.C. 1252.

           CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED

   1. The First Amendment of the United States Constitution provides
in pertinent part:

         Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
      religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.

   2. Section 702 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-1,
provides:

         This subchapter shall not apply to an employer with respect
      to the employment of aliens outside any State, or to a religious
      corporation, association, educational institution, or society
      with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular
      religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such
      corporation, association, educational institution, or society of
      its activities.

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether Section 702 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C.
2000e-1, which exempts all activities conducted by religious
organizations from the statutory prohibition against discrimination in
employment on the basis of religion, is invalid under the
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the extent that it
exempts the secular activities of such organizations from the
prohibition against religious discrimination.

                               STATEMENT

   1. The Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (CPB) and the Corporation of the President
of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (COP), conduct a
variety of activities on behalf of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.  /2/ One of these activities is the operation of
the Deseret Gymnasium, a recreational structure located in Salt Lake
City, Utah, that contains facilities for physical exercise and
athletic games and is open to the general public.  The gymnasium was
constructed on property owned by the CPB with funds supplied by the
COP.  Moreover, the gymnasium has no independent financial existence;
purchases and hiring for the gymnasium are conducted under the
auspices of the COP.  The policy governing employment at the gymnasium
-- which also applies to employment in other Church-owned activities
-- is to hire only members of the Church who are eligible for a
"temple recommend," a privilege that is accorded to observant Church
members.  J.S. App. 2a-4a, 11a-15a, 94a.

   Appellee Frank Mayson was employed at the Deseret Gymnasium as an
engineer responsible for maintaining the building's physical plant.
In the fall of 1980, the director of the gymnasium informed Mayson
that he would lose his job unless he qualified for a temple recommend
within six months.  Mayson did not qualify and was discharged on April
10, 1981, J.S. App. 3a-4a, 17a, 119a.

   2. Mayson and several other individuals who lost jobs in
Church-owned establishments because they did not achieve temple
recommend status subsequently commenced this action against the COP
and the CPB in the United States District Court for the District of
Utah.  /3/ The plaintiffs claimed that the discharges for failure to
obtain a temple recommend constituted discrimination in employment on
the basis of religion in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-2(a).  /4/

   The COP and the CPB moved to dismiss the action, relying on Section
702 of Title VII, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-1, which states that Title VII
"shall not apply * * * to a religious corporation * * * with respect
to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform
work connected with the carrying on by such corporation * * * of its
activities." The district court denied the motion, holding that
Section 702 violates the Establishment Clause insofar as it exempts
the secular activities of religious organizations from the provisions
of Title VII prohibiting religious discrimination (J.S. App. 1a-82a).

   Implicitly concluding that religious activities conducted by
religious organizations could permissibly be exempted from Title VII's
nondiscrimination mandate, the district court as a threshold matter
considered whether the Deseret Gymnasium constituted a religious
activity.  The court formulated a three-part test for determining
whether an activity conducted by a religious organization is
"religious" or "secular." It first evaluated "the tie between the
religious organization and the (gymnasium) with regard to areas such
as financial affairs, day-to-day operations and management" (J.S. App.
10a).  Observing that Church officials appoint the members of the
governing board of the Deseret Gymnasium and that the gymnasium has no
financial existence independent of the COP (id. at 11a-12a), the court
concluded that "there is an intimate connection between Deseret and
the defendants and the Mormon Church" (id. at 12a).

   The court next considered whether there was "a clear relationship
between the primary function which Deseret performs and the religious
beliefs and tenets of the Mormon Church or church administration"
(J.S. App. 13a).  It found that "(a)lthough the Mormon Church has
expressed its desire that members of the Mormon Church engage in
physical exercise and (has) attempted to provide a facility to
accommodate that desire in an atmosphere which exemplifies its
beliefs, the function of Deseret is far from closely related to any
religious beliefs or tenets of the Mormon Church or church
administration" (J.S. App. 16a (footnote omitted)).  The court
concluded that the Deseret Gymnasium instead serves the same functions
as other gymnasiums.  Finally, the court observed that "(n)one of
(Mayson's) duties is even tangentially related to any conceivable
religious belief or ritual of the Mormon Church or church
administration" (id. at 17a).  It therefore concluded that the
operation of the gymnasium did not constitute a religious activity.
/5/

   Turning to the question whether the application of Section 702 to a
religious organization's secular activities violates the Establishment
Clause, the district court evaluated the constitutionality of Section
702 by utilizing the three-part test prescribed by this Court in Lemon
v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971).  The district court first found that
the 1972 amendment to Section 702 extending the exemption to the
non-religious activities of religious organizations was supported by
the secular purpose of limiting government interference with religious
activities.  The court observed that "(t)he legislative goal of
assuring that the government remains neutral and does not meddle in
religious affairs by interfering with the decisionmaking process in
religions is a valid secular purpose.  Furthermore, there is no
indication that Congress amended section 702 for a religious purpose
or to promote religion or religious beliefs" (J.S. App. 40a (footnote
omitted)).

   The court concluded, however, that Section 702 failed the second
part of the Lemon test because the provision has the primary effect of
advancing religion.  The court acknowledged that "'the limits of
permissible state accommodation of religion are by no means
co-extensive with the noninterference mandate of the free exercise
clause'" (J.S. App. 42a-43a, quoting Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S.
664, 673 (1970)), but it stated that "if a statute goes beyond what is
mandated by the free exercise clause in accommodating religion, the
statute may no longer maintain the requisite course of constitutional
neutrality" (J.S. App. 43a).  The court then determined (id. at
43a-58a) that the exemption of the secular activities of religious
organizations from Title VII's prohibition against religious
discrimination is not necessary to avoid excessive government
entanglement with religion and is not compelled by the Free Exercise
Clause.

   The court also found that Section 702 lacks "characteristics that
the Supreme Court has looked to in declaring statutes valid as against
claims of establishment clause violations"(J.S. App. 66a).  It
observed that the exemption did not extend to "a broad spectrum of
groups" but was limited to religious organizations (id. at 61a), the
exemption was not supported by historical tradition or by any threat
of hostility to religion, and the exemption was not justified by the
concerns underlying the Free Exercise Clause (id. at 66a-69a).  The
court found that Section 702 instead amounts to government sponsorship
of religion because it allows religious organizations to increase
their influence over the secular economy and "grant(s) religious
organizations an exclusive authorization to engage in conduct which
can directly and immediately advance religious tenets and practices"
(J.S. App. 70a).

   Finally, the district court applied the third prong of the Lemon
test, considering whether Section 702 fosters excessive government
entanglement with religion.  The court found that the exemption
enables a religious organization to exercise "coercive power" over the
religious beliefs of its employees, and that this "potential for
impermissible fostering of religion" supports a "finding of excessive
entanglement" (J.S. App. 73a, 74a).  The court observed, however, that
"Section 702 does not require the type of comprehensive,
discriminatory and continuous state or federal surveillance that was
condemned in cases such as Lemon.  * * * On the contrary, this
exemption was designed to minimize involvement and entanglement
between church and state and to ensure that the government and courts
do not go through the rigors of inspecting and analyzing whether the
activities in which a religious entity is engaging are religious or
secular, thus avoiding an intimate and continuing relationship between
church and state" (J.S. App. 74a-75a (footnote omitted)).

   The court concluded that it was not necessary to balance the three
Lemon factors.  On the basis of its finding that "the direct and
immediate effect of the exemption * * * is to advance religion," the
court held that the application of the exemption to the secular
activities of religious organizations violates the Establishment
Clause (J.S. App. 75a).  /6/ Implicitly holding that the discharge of
appellee Mayson was the result of religious discrimination, the court
concluded that the discharge violated Title VII.  It ordered the
reinstatement of appellee Mayson and awarded back pay with interest
(J.S. App. 116a-120a).  On January 22, 1986, the court entered a final
judgment in favor of appellee Mayson under Rule 54(b) of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure.

   The district court subsequently vacated this judgment and issued an
order certifying to the Attorney General of the United States that the
constitutionality of Section 702 had been drawn into question in the
present case (see 28 U.S.C. 2403(a)).  The United States intervened
and filed a brief defending the constitutionality of Section 702.
Following a hearing, the district court reaffirmed its prior order and
again entered a final judgment in favor of appellant Mayson.  J.S.
App. 83a-87a.

                      THE QUESTION IS SUBSTANTIAL

   The district court has overturned Congress's determination that the
statutory program for combating religious discrimination in employment
should be adjusted to accommodate the special characteristics of
religious organizations.  Congress exempted religious organizations
from Title VII's prohibition against religious discrimination in order
to prevent government interference in religious affairs.  The district
court's conclusion that Congress's exemption may constitutionally be
applied only to the religious activities of such organizations would
require in every case an examination of the religious beliefs of the
particular group to determine whether the activity implicated by the
claim of discrimination was sufficiently "religious" to allow
invocation of the exemption.  This governmental evaluation of the
connection between the beliefs and activities of religious
organizations is precisely what Congress sought to avoid by adopting
the broad exemption contained in Section 702.

   The district court plainly erred by concluding that the
Establishment Clause, which has as one of its purposes the prevention
of entanglement between government and religion, prohibits Congress
from acting to ensure the separation of government and religion by
adopting a statutory exemption for religious groups.  /7/ Indeed, this
Court repeatedly has approved exemptions from generally applicable
statutes for religious individuals and institutions similar to the
exemption at issue in this case, and these decisions make clear that
Congress acted within its authority by enacting the accommodation of
religious groups contained in Section 702.  The district court's
conclusion that Section 702 violates the Establishment Clause is based
upon its application of the test prescribed by this Court in Lemon v.
Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971).  That court's evaluation of Section 702
under the Lemon test is, however, deeply flawed;  a proper application
of the standard confirms that Section 702 comports with the
requirements of the Establishment Clause.  Review by this Court
therefore is clearly warranted.

   1. It is well settled that the Establishment Clause does not flatly
forbid all government action relating to religion:  "Rather than
mechanically invalidating all governmental conduct or statutes that
confer benefits or give special recognition to religion in general or
to one faith -- as an absolutist approach would dictate -- the Court
has scrutinized challenged legislation or official conduct to
determine whether, in reality, it establishes a religion or religious
faith, or tends to do so" (Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668, 678
(1984)).  Quoting a distinguished early commentator, the Court has
observed that "'(t)he real object of the (First) Amendment was . . .
to prevent any national ecclesiastical establishment, which should
give to an hierarchy the exclusive patronage of the national
government.'" Ibid., quoting 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the
Constitution of the United States 728 (1833).  Thus, the evil against
which the Clause protects is the "'sponsorship, financial support, and
active involvement of the sovereign in religious activity.'" Committee
for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist, 413 U.S. 756, 772
(1973) (citation omitted);  see also School District v. Ball, No.
83-990 (July 1, 1985), slip op. 7.

   Government accommodation of religious institutions or religious
individuals is entirely consistent with these principles.  Indeed, the
Court has observed that "evidence of accommodation of all faiths and
all forms of religious expression" pervades our Nation's history, and
that "(t)hrough this accommodation * * * governmental action has
'follow(ed) the best of our traditions' and 'respect(ed) the religious
nature of our people.'" Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. at 677-678
(citation omitted);  see also Wallace v. Jaffree, No. 83-812 (June 4,
1985), slip op. 16-18 (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment);
Thomas v. Review Board, 450 U.S. 707, 726-727 (1981) (Rehnquist, J.,
dissenting);  McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S. 618, 638-639 (1978) (Brennan,
J., concurring).  Far from establishing religion, accommodation by
government of religious beliefs or institutions produces a "benevolent
neutrality which will permit religious exercise to exist without
sponsorship and without interference" (Walz v. Tax Commission, 397
U.S. 664, 669 (1970)).

   The most obvious means by which government may foster this
"benevolent neutrality" is through the adoption of special exemptions
from generally applicable statutes in order to accommodate individual
religious beliefs or protect the autonomy of religious organizations.
And this Court consistently has recognized that exemptions of this
type do not offend the Establishment Clause.  For example, in Zorach
v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306 (1952), the Court upheld a statute permitting
the release of a student from public school classes so that the
student could attend a religious center for religious instruction.
The Court observed that "(w)hen the state encourages religious
instruction or cooperates with religious authorities by adjusting the
schedule of public events to sectarian needs, it follows the best of
our traditions," and held that the exemption on religious grounds from
the compulsory attendance requirement did not effect an establishment
of religion (343 U.S. at 313-314).

   Similarly, in Walz v. Tax Commission, supra, the Court rejected an
Establishment Clause challenge to a statute creating a state property
tax exemption for property owned by a religious organization and used
for religious purposes.  The Court could not "read (the) statute as
attempting to establish religion;  it is simply sparing the exercise
of religion from the burden of property taxation levied on private
profit institutions." 397 U.S. at 673;  see also United States v. Lee,
455 U.S. 252, 260 & n.11 (1982) (indicating approval of statute
exempting religious objectors from the obligation to pay social
security taxes);  Gillette v. United States, 401 U.S. 437 (1971)
(upholding exemption from the military draft for conscientious
objectors);  Braunfeld v. Brown, 366 U.S. 599, 608 (1961) (indicating
that Sabbatarian exception to Sunday closing laws would be
constitutionally permissible);  Selective Draft Law Cases, 245 U.S.
366, 389-390 (1918) (upholding exemption from the draft for religious
objectors).  /8/

   Section 702 adjusts the regulatory scheme established in Title VII
to accommodate the special interests of religious institutions in a
manner similar to the exemptions previously approved by this Court.
Congress recognized that subjecting the secular activities of
religious organizations to the prohibition against religious
discrimination would necessitate an inquiry into religious beliefs and
a detailed examination of the characteristics of the activity
implicated by each particular claim of religious discrimination.  The
investigation would culminate in governmental evaluation of the
religious group's conclusion that the activity was sufficiently
related to its beliefs to require consideration of religion in
connection with employment decisions.  Not only would this process
require government to enter sensitive areas of religious belief (see
Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. at 691 (Brennan, J., concurring));
but the threat of government review of employment decisions might
inhibit a religious group from acting according to its beliefs out of
fear that hiring decisions based upon religion might later be grounds
for the imposition of liability under Title VII.  Thus, Congress's
decision to allow religious groups to use religion as an employment
criterion free of government interference has the legitimate effect of
accommodating religious institutions and furthering the separation of
government and religion.  /9/

   Moreover, the exemption embodied in Section 702 does not amount to
government sponsorship or advancement of religion.  The exemption does
not in any way grant federal financial aid to religious organizations
or directly provide such organizations with a financial advantage over
competitiors in the secular economy.  /10/ In addition, religious
groups remain subject to Title VII's prohibition against
discrimination in employment on the basis of race, color, national
origin, and sex;  like other employers, religious organizations are
required to report the race, color, national origin, and sex of their
employees to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (29 C.F.R.
1602.7).  /11/

   Even if a financial benefit did exist, that circumstance would not
automatically render Section 702 violative of the Establishment
Clause.  The property tax exemption approved in Walz v. Tax
Commission, supra, conferred a far greater financial benefit than
religious organizations could secure as a result of the exemption
contained in Section 702.  Yet the Court in that case upheld the
exemption and did not find that it resembled impermissible financial
aid to religion or could lead to domination of the economy by
religious groups.

   The district court stated (J.S. App. 69a-70a) that the Section 702
exemption amounts to government sponsorship of religion, but it did
not supply the reasons for this conclusion.  The mere fact that
Section 702 contains an exemption limited to religious organizations
obviously does not constitute government sponsorship of religion;
otherwise all accommodations of religion would be barred by the
Establishment Clause.  An exemption from government regulation simply
does not amount to the "symbolic union of church and state" that this
Court has prohibited under the First Amendment (School District v.
Ball, slip op. 16).

   The district court also observed (J.S. App. 70a-72a-73a) that
Section 702 permits a religious organization to use employment
opportunities to encourage adherence to its religious beliefs.  Prior
to the enactment of Title VII, of course, all private employers were
free to discriminate on the basis of religion;  Congress's failure to
prohibit discrimination by religious institutions during that period
plainly did not constitute an establishment of religion.  Similarly,
the fact that Congress has chosen in some circumstances to exempt
religious discrimination from Title VII's antidiscrimination
requirement does not violate the First Amendment.  The legislative
determination that religious institutions should be insulated from
this regulatory requirement does not in any way resemble the state
sponsorship of religion prohibited by the Establishment Clause.  Any
advantage obtained by religious groups is not a product of government
compulsion;  the government simply has left these groups free to
follow the dictates of their faiths.  /12/

   Even the district court agreed that religious groups may
discriminate on the basis of religion in connection with their
religious activities.  Since Congress's failure to prohibit that
discrimination does not constitute the establishment of religion, it
is difficult to see how the extension of the exemption to include
these groups' secular activities could violate the Constitution.

   2. The district court's determination that Section 702 violates the
Establishment Clause appears to rest in large part upon its view that
"if a statute goes beyond what is mandated by the free exercise clause
in accommodating religion, the statute may no longer maintain the
requisite course of constitutional neutrality" (J.S. App. 43a).  This
Court never has indicated that an accommodation of religion beyond
what is required by the Free Exercise Clause is likely to contravene
the Establishment Clause.  The Court instead has made clear that
"(t)he limits of permissible state accommodation to religion are by no
means coextensive with the noninterference mandated by the Free
Exercise Clause.  To equate the two would be to deny a national
heritage." Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. at 673;  see also Bowen v.
Roy, No. 84-780 (June 11, 1986), slip op. 18 & n.19 (opinion of
Burger, C.J.);  Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 16 (O'Connor, J.,
concurring in the judgment);  Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. 783, 812
(1983) (Brennan, J., dissenting);  Gillette v. United States, 401 U.S.
at 453.  Since Section 702 does not constitute government sponsorship
of religion and therefore does not contravene the principle underlying
the Establishment Clause, it is a permissible exercise of Congress's
authority to accommodate religious institutions.

   The district court utilized the test prescribed by this Court in
Lemon v. Kurtzman, supra, to evaluate appellees' challenge to Section
702 under the Establishment Clause.  Lemon set forth a three-part
standard:  "First, the statute must have a secular legislative
purpose;  second, its principal or primary effect must be one that
neither advances nor inhibits religion;  finally, the statute must not
foster 'an excessive government entanglement with religion'" (403 U.S.
at 612-613 (citations omitted)).  The district court's decision
demonstrates the problems that may result when the Lemon standard is
applied to evaluate a statute designed to accommodate religious
beliefs and institutions -- an inflexible construction of the
"purpose" or the "effect" components of the test may lead to the
incorrect conclusion that the accommodation of religion has a
religious purpose or effect and therefore is barred by the
Establishment Clause.  See Wallace v. Jaffree, slip op. 17 (O'Connor,
J., concurring in the judgment).  For that reason, here, as in Lynch
v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. at 679, and Marsh v. Chambers, supra, recourse
to the Lemon standard is not appropriate in assessing the
constitutionality of Section 702.

   Even if Section 702 is evaluated under the standard announced in
Lemon, however, it is clear that the provision is permissible under
the Constitution.  Section 702 plainly satisfies the first prong of
the Lemon test.  The original version of Section 702 contained an
exemption only for religious activities conducted by religious
organizations;  discrimination in employment on the basis of religion
was barred with respect to secular activities conducted by such
organizations (42 U.S.C. (1964 ed.) 2000e-1).  Congress amended the
statute in 1972 to extend the exemption to all activities conducted by
religious organizations (42 U.S.C. 2000e-1).  The legislative history
of the 1972 amendment makes clear that the purpose of the amendment
was to limit government intrusion into matters of religious belief and
church administration.  See 118 Cong. Rec. 946-949 (1972) (remarks of
Sen. Allen);  id. at 4503 (remarks of Sen. Ervin).  The district court
correctly concluded that "(t)he legislative goal of assuring that the
government remains neutral and does not meddle in religious affairs by
interfering with the decision-making process in religions is a valid
secular purpose.  Furthermore, there is no indication that Congress
amended section 702 for a religious purpose or to promote religion or
religious beliefs" (J.S. App. 40a (footnote omitted)).

   The second inquiry under Lemon is whether the "principle or primary
effect" of the statute is to advance or inhibit religion.  The
district court inexplicably ignored what it had found to be the
secular purpose of the statute in evaluating the statute's effect, and
concluded that the statute had the effect of advancing religion.  But,
as we have discussed (see pages 13-17), the principal effect of the
statute is to eliminate government interference with religious
organizations.  Thus, as in Walz and Zorach, the effect of the statute
is to avoid interference with religious institutions, a result that
plainly is permissible under the Establishment Clause (Wallace v.
Jaffree, slip op. 16-18 (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment)).

   Finally, Section 702 does not contravene the third part of the
Lemon standard because it does not result in the entanglement of
government and religion.  Congress's decision to prevent any
interference with the religion-conscious hiring practices of religious
organizations is the statutory approach least likely to create
entanglement between religion and government.  Elimination of the
Section 702 exemption, on the other hand, would subject the employment
decisions of religious organizations to continuing supervision by the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission through its broad statutory
authority to investigate allegations of discrimination (see EEOC v.
Shell Oil Co., 466 U.S. 54 (1984)).

   Thus, Section 702 satisfies all three parts of the Lemon test.  The
statute accordingly does not violate the Establishment Clause, and the
district court erred by declaring Section 702 unconstitutional insofar
as it applies to secular activities of religious organizations.

                              CONCLUSION

   Probable jurisdiction should be noted.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   WM. BRADFORD REYNOLDS

      Assistant Attorney General

   DONALD B. AYER

      Deputy Solicitor General

   MICHAEL CARVIN

      Deputy Assistant Attorney General

   ANDRES J. PINCUS

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   IRVING GORNSTEIN

   WILLIAM R. YEOMANS

      Attorneys

   SEPTEMBER 1986

   /1/ "J.S. App." refers to the appendix to the jurisdictional
statement filed by the private appellants, Corporation of the
Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v.
Amos, No. 86-179.

   /2/ The CPB and the COP are corporations organized under Utah law
(J.S. App. 2a-3a).

   /3/ The complaint was styled as a class action, but the district
court did not certify a class.  The other individual plaintiffs
included appellees Christine J. Amos, Judy L. Bawden, Deniece Kanon,
April Joyce Riding, Ruth Arriola, and Shelleen Adamson, who were
employed as seamtresses at Beehive Clothing Mills, a Church owned and
operated establishment that manufactures garments worn by Church
members in religious ceremonies.  Each of these individuals was
discharged after she failed to satisfy the requirements for a temple
recommend.  J.S. App. 3a-4a.  The district court did not resolve these
appellees' claims because it found that disputed issues of fact
precluded a determination on motion for summary judgment regarding
whether Beehive constitutes a religious or a secular activity (id. at
18a-19a, 93a-105a).

   Appellee Ralph Whitaker was employed by Deseret Industries, a
division of the Church's Welfare Services Department, and also was
terminated for failing to obtain a temple recommend (J.S. App.
105a-107a).  The district court concluded that "Deseret Industries is
a religious activity as there is an intimate connection between
Industries and the defendants and the Mormon Church and between the
primary function of Industries and the religious tenets of the Church"
(id. at 116a).  The court granted summary judgment in favor of the COP
and the CPB with respect to appellee Whitaker's claim, holding that
religious activities conducted by religious organizations are exempt
from Title VII's prohibition against discrimination on the basis of
religion (id. at 105a).

   /4/ The statute bars an employer from "discharg(ing) any individual
* * * because of such individual's * * * religion" (42 U.S.C.
2000e-2(a)(1)).  The plaintiffs also argued that the discharges
violated the parallel provision of the Utah antidiscrimination
statute.  Utah Code Ann. Section 34-35-6(1) (Supp. 1986).

   /5/ The court also considered whether the exemption from the
prohibition against religious discrimination contained in Section 702
applies to the secular activities of religious organizations.  Noting
that Congress in 1972 expressly broadened the exemption in order to
cover all activities of religious organizations, the court concluded
that Section 702 encompasses a religious organization's secular
activities.  J.S. App. 19a-21a.

   /6/ The court indicated that its "determination regarding (Section
702) applies with equal force to the (parallel) state (law) exemption
as it relates to the facts of this case" (J.S. App. 8a).  It declined
to address appellees' arguments that the application of Section 702 to
secular activities violates the due process and equal protection
principles embodied in the Fifth Amendment (id. at 76a), and it
dismissed appellees' state law claims for wrongful discharge and
intentional infliction of emotional distress (id. at 77a-82a).

   /7/ Two other courts, in dictum, have expressed doubts about the
constitutionality of Section 702 as applied to the secular activities
of religious organizations.  King's Garden, Inc. v. FCC, 498 F.2d 51,
54-57 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 419 U.S. 996 (1974);  Feldstein v.
Christian Science Monitor, 555 F. Supp. 974, 978-979 (D. Mass. 1983).

   /8/ In NLRB v. Catholic Bishop, 440 U.S. 490 (1979), the question
was whether the National Labor Relations Board could exercise
jurisdiction over teachers employed in church-operated schools.  The
Court construed the National Labor Relations Act to exclude coverage
of such teachers on the ground that a contrary result would require
the Court "to resolve difficult and sensitive questions arising out of
the guarantees of the First Amendment Religion Clauses" (440 U.S. at
507).  Thus, the Court expressly recognized an exemption for religious
institutions from a generally applicable regulatory requirement.  See
also St. Martin Evangelical Lutheran Church v. South Dakota, 451 U.S.
772 (1981) (church-run schools exempted from mandatory coverage under
Federal Unemployment Tax Act).

   /9/ The district court observed (J.S. App. 45a-52a) that courts
already examine the employment practices of religious institutions in
connection with Title VII's prohibition against discrimination on the
basis of race, color, national origin and sex.  It seems probable,
however, that claims of religious discrimination would be more likely
to require government review of religious beliefs, especially where
the permissibility of such discrimination turns upon distinguishing
between religious and secular activities;  indeed, the district court
acknowledged this fact (id. at 51a).  Congress was free to enact
Section 702 in order to prevent that possibility.

   /10/ The district court intimated (J.S. App. 69a-70a) that the
exemption for secular activities contained in Section 702 would enable
religious organizations to expand their business interests, but it did
not supply the reasoning upon which this conclusion was based.  Such a
conclusion would seem to be at odds with the underlying premise of
Title VII that discrimination is uneconomic in part because it
prevents employers from hiring the best available candidates.

   /11/ Neither religious nor secular employers are required to report
the religion of their employees.

   /12/ The statute found to violate the Establishment Clause in
Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc., No. 83-1158 (June 26, 1985), slip
op. 7, was impermissible because it had the primary effect of
"advanc(ing) a particular religious practice" -- Sabbath observance --
and forced private individuals to accommodate this religious practice
without regard to the burden imposed upon those private individuals.
Section 702, by contrast, does not endorse any specific practice and
does not compel any private individual to take any action regarding
religious observance.  The provision thus mandates separation between
government and religion rather than government intervention with
respect to religious concerns.

   APPENDIX
