*This is an archive page. The links are no longer being updated.
1992.03.26 :  AIDS Education

Contact:  CDC Press Office (404) 639-3286
March 26, 1992

        Saying that millions of Americans still do not understand
that they may be at risk for HIV infection, HHS Secretary Louis
W. Sullivan, M.D., today introduced a new phase of TV ads and
other AIDS educational efforts in which ordinary people emphasize
the risk of infection to women, sexually active young people and
small-town Americans.
        "Our urgent message is that this disease is not confined
to the big cities," Secretary Sullivan said.  "Americans of all
ages need to understand that if they engage in high-risk sexual
or drug-use behaviors, regardless of who they are or where they
live, they can become infected with HIV."
        The new phase of the CDC educational program, "America
Responds to AIDS," reflects surveys that show most Americans know
the basic facts about AIDS but do not believe that people in
their town or group are at risk.  The aim of the new message is
to say that anyone who engages in high-risk sexual or drug-use
behaviors is at risk, regardless of age, gender or where they
live.
        The new campaign, "Americans Working Together to Prevent
HIV Infection and AIDS," has special impact, Secretary Sullivan
said, because it focuses on the true stories of three individuals
with HIV infection.  "They are real people who understand the
risk and are willing to share their experience in order to help
others," Sullivan said.  The individuals are Krista Blake, 19,
from Columbiana, Ohio; Peter Zamora, 19, from Hialeah/Miami,
Fla.; and Frankie Alston, 36, from Alexandria, Va.
        "A million Americans are currently infected with HIV. 
This represents almost one in every 100 adult males and about one
in every 800 adult females,"  Dr. Sullivan said.  "Every 13
minutes, another person is infected.  If we are to control this
epidemic, every person must know he or she can be at risk."
        During 1992 alone, according to estimates by the Centers
for Disease Control, 40,000 Americans will become infected with
HIV, and as many as 40,000 will die as a result of AIDS.  
        "The number of reported AIDS cases has just surpassed
200,000, and the magnitude of the epidemic is increasing," said
James Mason, M.D., assistant secretary for health and head of the
Public Health Service.  "You can see the escalation: the first
100,000 cases occurred over eight years and the next 100,000 in
just slightly more than two years.  AIDS is now the third leading
cause of death among adults age 25-44.  Many are heeding the
messages of sexual restraint and protection but too many teens,
small-town folks and women think 'it can't happen to us here.' 
Unfortunately, it can." 
        James W. Curran, M.D., director of HIV/AIDS at the CDC,
said, "In the past 10 years, thousands of individuals and
organizations across the country have made a personal commitment
and devoted themselves to preventing HIV and AIDS.  In addition
to educating their families and friends, many people are carrying
HIV prevention messages to their communities through worksites,
schools, religious groups and other organizations.  A
comprehensive and sustained commitment by all segments of a
community can make a significant contribution to stopping this
epidemic.  However, given the continuing spread of the disease,
each and every American must get involved."
        The CDC is the Public Health Service agency within HHS
which manages the nation's HIV and AIDS prevention efforts.  Its
comprehensive program includes: the "America Responds to AIDS"
public education campaign; the CDC National AIDS Hotline; the CDC
National AIDS Clearinghouse; coalition building with national,
state and local organizations; and public health communications
assistance to state AIDS programs.                           
        The new phase includes multimedia public service
advertisements and a variety of print materials including a
brochure entitled "Preventing HIV and AIDS:  What You Can Do." 
The PSAs -- radio and television announcements, print
advertisements and posters -- have been produced in both English
and Spanish.
        "Preventing HIV and AIDS:  What You Can Do" provides
specific activities and tips to help the public educate
themselves, their families and their communities about HIV
prevention.  The public can obtain a free copy of the brochure,
other materials, referrals and confidential AIDS counseling by
calling the toll-free CDC National AIDS Hotline (1-800-342-AIDS).


                                ###
 
