                       July Hotline Monthly Report
                            EPA530-R-95-002g
                              PB95-922 406


Hotline Questions and Answers

UST

1.   Use of Manual Tank Gauging as Sole Means of Release
     Detection for 1,000 Gallon Tanks

  The following Monthly Report Question replaces the Monthly
  Report Question published in the February 1995 Monthly Hotline
  Report

   The regulations of 40 CFR Part 280, SubpartD require owners
and operators of new and existing underground storage tanks
(USTs) to demonstrate release detection by using one of the
methods found in 280.43(d) through (h).  Can manual tank gauging
alone be used to meet the requirements for  other types of
release detection methods  acceptable under 40 CFR 280.43(h)?

   Almost all owners and operators of USTs must eventually meet
the release detection requirements of Part 280, Subpart D, by
using one of the methods listed in 40 CFR 280.43(d) through (h). 
Section 280.43(h)(1) allows the use of an alternative method, or
a combination of methods, to satisfy the UST release detection
requirements.  These methods must be able to detect a 0.2 gallon
per hour leak rate or a release of 150 gallons within a month
with a probability of detection of 0.95 and a probability of
false alarm of 0.05.

   To the Agency s knowledge, manual tank gauging alone has not
been shown to be able to meet the performance standards in 40 CFR
280.43(h)(1) for tanks constructed to hold more than 1000
gallons.  For smaller tanks designed to contain 1000 gallons or
less, however, manual tank gauging has been demonstrated to meet
the performance standard when conducted in accordance with the
following procedure:

   1.  Tank liquid measurement levels are taken at the beginning
       and end of a time period during which no liquid is added
       to or removed from the tank.  The appropriate time period
       is listed in the chart  below.
   
   2.  Level measurements are based on an average of two
       consecutive stick readings at both the beginning and end
       of the period.
   
   3.  The equipment used is capable of measuring the level of
       product over the full range of the tank's height to the
       nearest one-eighth of an inch.
   
   4.  Testing is conducted  at least once a week and four
       weekly results are averaged to obtain a monthly result. 
       If the variation between beginning and ending
       measurements exceeds the weekly or monthly standards in
       the following table, a leak is suspected and will be subject 
       to the release reporting requirements of 40 CFR
       Subpart E.


       Tank Size             Minimum       Weekly Standard   Monthly Standard
                          Duration of        (1 test)            (4-test 
                               Test                               average)

     up to 550 gallons        36 hours        10 gallons        5 gallons

     551-1,000 gallons        44 hours         9 gallons        4 gallons   
   (when tank diameter  
   is 64")

     551-1,000 gallons        58 hours        12 gallons        6 gallons  
   (when tank diameter  
   is 48")

CERCLA

2.   NPL Deletion/Deferral Policy and RCRA Subtitle C
     Corrective Action

   EPA has the authority under both CERCLA and RCRA to address
the cleanup of contaminated sites.  Under what circumstances will
EPA address a contaminated site through one of the RCRA Subtitle
C corrective action authorities rather than list the site on the
CERCLA National Priorities List (NPL)?  If a site is already on
the NPL, what are the criteria for deleting the site and
deferring it to RCRA?

   To conserve Superfund resources and avoid duplication of
effort, EPA has maintained a policy of not to undertake CERCLA
responses at certain sites that can or will be adequately
addressed by RCRA.  Consequently, instead of listing sites on the
NPL, the Agency often defers sites that otherwise meet the NPL
criteria to RCRA Subtitle C corrective action.  Under current
policy, EPA may defer sites to RCRA at any point in the NPL
process, including after placement on the NPL.  EPA has had a
policy of deferring certain sites from listing since the first
NPL final rule on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40658). 

   Prior to the enactment of the Hazardous and Solid Waste
Amendments of 1984 (HSWA), the RCRA Subtitle C corrective action
authorities only applied to certain releases from surface
impoundments, waste piles, land treatment areas, and landfills
that received hazardous wastes after July 27, 1982.  HSWA
expanded the RCRA Subtitle C corrective action authorities,
giving EPA the authority to address the on- and off-site cleanup
of releases from active and inactive permitted and interim status
hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities
(TSDFs).  In order to implement this broader authority, in 1986,
the Agency developed a policy for the listing or deferral from
listing of potential NPL sites (51 FR 21057; June 10, 1986). 
According to the 1986 deferral policy, EPA will generally defer
the listing of potential NPL sites when other authorities exist
that are capable of accomplishing the needed corrective action. 

   The Agency will not automatically defer all sites eligible
for cleanup under RCRA.  For example, EPA will not defer  federal
facilities from the NPL, because federal facilities are not
eligible for Fund-financed remedial action, and deferring them
would not conserve Fund monies (54 FR 10520; March 13, 1989).  In
addition, the Agency will continue to include RCRA sites not
subject to Subtitle C corrective action authorities, such as
generator and transporter sites, on the NPL.  EPA is also
reluctant to defer sites owned by persons who are unwilling or
unable to pay for corrective action and related activities
because these owners are unlikely to take corrective action as
required by RCRA.  For this reason, the 1986 deferral policy
clarifies that the Agency will not defer sites meeting the
criteria for listing on the NPL that fall into one of the
following categories:
       
       RCRA facilities owned by bankrupt persons;
       RCRA facilities that have lost authorization to operate
       under the RCRA Loss of Interim Status (LOIS) provision
       and are owned by persons who have indicated an
       unwillingness to undertake corrective action; and
       Facilities that have not lost authorization to operate,
       but that are owned by people who have, as determined on a
       case-by-case basis, a clear history of unwillingness to
       undertake corrective action.
         
   On June 24, 1988 (53 FR 23979), EPA clarified the deferral
policy and added the following four categories of RCRA facilities
to those types of sites which it will not defer from inclusion on
the NPL:

       Non- or late-filers   treatment, storage, or disposal
       facilities that managed hazardous waste after November
       19, 1980, but did not file Part A RCRA permit
       applications by that date and have little or no history
       of compliance with RCRA;
       
       Converters   facilities that previously treated or stored
       hazardous waste, but have since converted to activities
       that do not require interim status and have therefore
       formally withdrawn their Part A applications;  
       
       Protective filers   facilities that filed RCRA Part A
       permit applications as a precautionary measure for
       treatment, storage, or disposal operations that do not
       require interim status and are not subject to RCRA
       Subtitle C corrective action authorities; and
       
       Pre-HSWA permittees   sites holding permits issued before
       the enactment of the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments
       (HSWA).
         
   These types of sites are either not subject to RCRA Subtitle
C corrective action authorities or are not high priorities under
RCRA and would not be promptly addressed by the RCRA corrective
action program.   The Agency has therefore decided to place these
sites on the NPL if they meet the listing criteria so that, if
necessary, the Superfund authorities are fully available. 
 
   On March 20, 1995 (60 FR 14641), EPA issued a new deferral
policy for sites after their placement on the NPL.  Previously,
once EPA made the decision to place a site on the NPL (rather
than defer the site to another cleanup authority), the Agency
would only delete the site from the NPL when no further response
at that site was appropriate (55 FR 8845; March 8, 1990).  This
policy meant EPA would not delete sites from the NPL to defer
them to RCRA during the response process, even if the Agency
determined that a RCRA response was appropriate.  Under the 1995
deletion/deferral policy, the Agency may, during the response
process, delete sites from the NPL based on deferral to the RCRA
Subtitle C corrective action program.  To be eligible for
deletion from the NPL based on deferral to RCRA, NPL sites must
meet the following criteria:

       The site must be eligible for deferral from inclusion on
       the NPL under EPA s current deferral policy (as discussed
       above);
       
       EPA must be currently addressing the site through a RCRA
       corrective action authority under an existing enforceable
       order or permit containing corrective action provisions;
       Response under RCRA must be progressing adequately; and
       Deletion must not disrupt any ongoing CERCLA response
       actions.

   Before a site may be deleted from the NPL under the
deferral/deletion policy, it must also meet other applicable
deletion requirements under CERCLA regulations.  In particular, a
site may only be deleted from the NPL after the state in which
the release was located has concurred with the proposed deletion
(40 CFR 300.425(e)(2)).  Thus, sites must also be evaluated by
the appropriate state authority before EPA can delete the sites
from the NPL for deferral to RCRA.


3.  Placement Within an Area of Contamination

   During the Superfund response process, EPA uses the area of
contamination concept (AOC) to assist officials in determining
when placement does and does not occur for CERCLA actions
involving on-site disposal of RCRA hazardous wastes.  EPA equates
an AOC to a single RCRA land disposal unit consisting of
continuous contamination of varying amounts and types.  Often, an
AOC contains separate, discrete wastes.  Those CERCLA hazardous
substances which are defined as hazardous waste under RCRA must
meet substantive Land Disposal Restrictions (LDR) standards in
certain circumstances.

   An AOC at a CERCLA site contains two piles of  RCRA-regulated
hazardous waste, generated from the same source.  The first pile
is removed from the AOC and is treated to meet RCRA LDR.  The
second waste pile is left untouched.  When the first waste pile
is subsequently returned to the AOC, it is co-mingled with the
waste which never left the AOC.  Despite the fact that it was
never removed from the AOC, is the untreated waste subject to LDR
treatment standards? 

   The untreated waste is not subject to LDR.  CERCLA 121(d)(2)
specifically requires that remedial activities must comply with
Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) of
federal, state, and local environmental laws.  LDR is an
applicable requirement only where waste such as contaminated soil
is placed on the land.  Placement does not occur, however, where
waste at a site is left undisturbed within an AOC, when it is
treated in situ, or when it is managed within the AOC without any
intervening treatment outside of the AOC (55 FR 8758; March 8,
1990).  Since the untreated waste is not "placed" during the
CERCLA response action, the LDRs are not ARARs.  Conversely, if
the waste is removed from an AOC, or treated in a separate unit
within the AOC and subsequently returned, the action constitutes
placement, and that waste must be treated to meet LDR standards
(55 FR 8758, 8760; March 8, 1990).


EPCRA

4.   EPCRA Requirements for a Facility Located Within the
     Planning Districts of Two LEPCs

   The reporting requirements of EPCRA 303(d), 311, and 312
require covered facilities to provide information on the presence
of extremely hazardous substances (EHSs) and hazardous chemicals
to the Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC) for the purpose
of preparing an emergency plan.  In general, facilities are
located within the boundaries of a single LEPC s emergency
planning district, allowing all notification to be made to the
same planning entity.  A certain facility subject to EPCRA
emergency planning requirements is located such that its
perimeter extends across the planning jurisdiction boundaries of
two LEPCs.  In this case, which LEPC is responsible for including
the facility in its emergency response plan?  To which LEPC
should the facility fulfill its reporting obligations under EPCRA
303(d), 304, 311, and 312?

   LEPCs who share jurisdiction over a facility should decide on
how they will share responsibility for including the facility in
their emergency planning activities and how they will accept
information required under EPCRA 303(d), 304, 311, and 312. 
With respect to 303(d), if the facility is located within two
districts, it must provide the required notification to both
LEPCs.  Since EPCRA 304 requires  facilities to notify the LEPC
responsible for any area likely to be affected by a release of a
reportable chemical (40 CFR 355.40(b)(1)), both LEPCs should
receive release notification to ensure sufficient emergency
response.  EPCRA 311 and 312 require information to be
submitted to the appropriate LEPC (EPCRA 311(a)(1)(A), and
312(a)(1)(A)).  LEPCs may reach an agreement as to which is the
appropriate LEPC, and thus determine which would receive
information submitted under 311 and 312.  In the absence of
such an agreement, the facility would need to report to both
LEPCs.


5.   Ammonia and Ammonium Hydroxide Reporting Under EPCRA 302
     and 304

   Ammonia (CAS #7664-41-7) is listed on the Extremely Hazardous
Substance (EHS) list found at 40 CFR Part 355 Appendix A and B,
with a threshold planning quantity (TPQ) of 500 pounds.  A
facility stores ammonium hydroxide (CAS #1336-21-6), which does
not appear on the EHS list, on site in excess of 500 pounds. 
Since ammonium hydroxide is essentially a mixture of ammonia and
water, should the facility include the quantity of ammonia in
ammonium hydroxide toward TPQ and reportable quantity (RQ)
calculations for purposes of EPCRA 302 and 304 reporting?

   The quantities of ammonia in ammonium hydroxide should be
considered separately when determining reporting requirements
under EPCRA 302 and 304.  This is consistent with the listing
under CERCLA (40 CFR Table 302.4), where ammonia and ammonium
hydroxide are specifically and separately listed as hazardous
substances. Thus, ammonia (CAS #7664-41-7) and ammonium hydroxide
(CAS #1336-21-6) are considered different chemicals for EHS
purposes.

   The notification requirement in EPCRA 302 applies to
facilities with quantities of EHSs present on-site equal to or in
excess of a TPQ.  Ammonia is considered an EHS, therefore, a
facility with  a TPQ or more of ammonia is required to provide
EPCRA 302 notification.  Since ammonium hydroxide is considered
distinct from ammonia, and is not specifically listed as an EHS,
it is not subject to emergency planning requirements.  A facility
storing a large quantity of ammonium hydroxide, however, may have
free ammonia in the headspace of a storage tank.  A facility must
report the ammonia in the headspace of a storage tank under EPCRA
302 if this amount of free ammonia equals or exceeds the TPQ at
any time.

   EPCRA 304 applies to chemicals listed as either CERCLA
hazardous substances (40 CFR 302.4) or EHSs.  Both ammonia and
ammonium hydroxide are specifically listed as CERCLA hazardous
substances and both chemicals, therefore, are subject to EPCRA
304 reporting requirements.  Ammonia has a RQ of 100 pounds and
ammonium hydroxide has an RQ of 1000 pounds.  If either chemical
is released to the environment  above its designated RQ within a
24-hour period, the facility is subject to EPCRA 304
notification requirements (40 CFR 355.40).


NEW PUBLICATIONS

How To Order...

NTIS Publications are available by calling (703) 487-4650, 
                            or writing NTIS,
             5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA  22161. 
          Use the NTIS Order Number listed under the document.
          EPA Publications are available through the Hotline. 
           Use the EPA Order Number listed under the document.
                     RCRA/UST, Superfund, and EPCRA
                  National Toll-Free No.: 800-424-9346
                           Local: 703-412-9810
                TDD National Toll-Free No.: 800-553-7672
                                    
RCRA

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT)
Background Document for Universal Standards Volume A: Universal
Standards for Nonwastewater Forms of Listed Hazardous Wastes"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 926

This background document, which is Part A of a two volume set,
provides EPA's rationale and technical support for selecting the
constituents regulated and the treatment requirements for the
wastewater forms in the universal treatment standards table under
the Land Disposal Restrictions program.  These universal
standards replace BDAT treatment standards in most of the
previously promulgated waste codes and are used to promulgate
treatment standards for newly listed wastes.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology Background
Document for F001-F005 Spent Solvents"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 876

This background document provides EPA's rationale and technical
support for revising the F001-F005 treatment standards
promulgated on November 7, 1986, and August 17, 1988.  It also
includes EPA's approach to and technical support for the
treatment standards for wastewater and nonwastewater forms of
F001-F005.  Finally, the document contains the revised F001-F005
treatment standards.

TITLE: "Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste:
Physical/Chemical Methods (SW-846) Third Edition; Final Update
11B"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-234 480

This packet contains revised material for inclusion in Test
Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste.  Specifically, it includes a
methods status table which is a sequentially numbered listing of
all SW-846 methods and their current status.  The update packet
also includes two revised methods: Method 9040B for pH
electrometric measurement and method 9045C for soil and waste pH.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technologies (BDAT)
Background Document for Chlorinated Toluene Wastes K149, K150,
and K151"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 942
                
This background document provides the Agency's rationale and
technical support for selecting the constituents regulated and
the applicable treatment standards under the Land Disposal
Restrictions program for the K149, K150, and K151 listed wastes. 
The document also contains waste characterization data that may
serve as a basis for determining whether a variance from the
applicable treatment standards is warranted for a particular type
of chlorinated toluene waste.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Technology (BDAT) Background
Document for Organic Toxicity Characteristic Wastes D018-D043 and
Addendum to Nonwastewater Forms of Pesticide Toxicity
Characteristic Wastes D012-D-017"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 918

This background document provides the Agency's rationale and
technical support for selecting the constituents regulated and
the applicable treatment standards under the Land Disposal
Restrictions program for the D018-D043 and D012-D017 listed
wastes.  This document also provides waste characterization data
that may serve as a basis for determining whether a variance from
the applicable treatment standards is warranted for a particular
waste.

TITLE: "Crude Oil and Natural Gas Exploration and Production
Wastes: Exemption from RCRA Subtitle C Regulation"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-K-95-003

This document was published to provide an understanding of the
exemption of certain oil and gas exploration and production (E&P)
wastes from regulation as hazardous wastes under Subtitle C of
RCRA.  Specifically, this document includes a basic background of
the E&P exemption and basic rules for determining the exempt or
non-exempt wastes, answers to frequently asked questions, and
additional  sources of information.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT)
Background Document for Newly Listed Refinery Wastes F034 and
F038"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 843

This background document provides EPA's rationale and technical
support for selecting the constituents regulated, and the
applicable standards under the Land Disposal Restrictions program
for the F037 and F038 listed wastes.  This document also provides
all waste characterization information available to the Agency.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT)
Background Document (Addendum) for All Nonwastewater Forms of
K061 and Alternative BDAT Treatment Standards for F006 and K062
Nonwastewaters"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 884

This background document is an addendum for the nonwastewater
forms of K061, K062, and F006 listed wastes under the Land
Disposal Restriction program.  The purpose of this document is to
present EPA's rationale and supporting technical information for
removing the existing subcategories for K061 nonwastewaters
(i.e., low zinc and high zinc) and establishing one set of
treatment standards that will apply to all nonwastewater forms of
K061.  This background document also presents the Agency's
decision for establishing alternative treatment standards for
F006 and K062 nonwastewaters.

TITLE: "Summary of OSW's RCRA Regulatory Reform Analysis:
Preliminary Results"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-R-95-015

This document reports the findings of the Office of Solid Waste's, OSW (Note:  Office of Solid Waste, OSW, was renamed Office of Resource Conservation and Recovery, ORCR, on January 18, 2009)
analysis of the existing regulations.  The report reviews each
section of the RCRA regulations, and places the section into one
of four recommendation categories: no action, obsolete, revision
of rules, or needed.  Background is given for EPA's rationale for
each designation.

TITLE: "Reusable News (Spring 1995"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-N-95-003

Reusable News is a quarterly newsletter that reports on municipal
solid waste management topics.  The Summer 1995 edition includes
articles that announce new milestone's reached in the McDonald's
"Buy Recycled" campaign, as well as efforts by the Atlanta
Committee for the Olympic Games to provide recycling bins and
other waste reducing measures for  the 1996 Summer Olympic Games. 
The newsletter also includes information regarding the increase
of household hazardous waste programs in the United States, and
it introduces two new resources available on life-cycle
assessments.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT)
Background Document for Universal Standards for Wastewater Forms
of Listed Hazardous Wastes"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 934

This background document, which is Part B of a two volume set,
provides EPA's rationale and technical support for selecting the
constituents regulated and the treatment requirements in the
universal treatment standards table under the Land Disposal
Restrictions program.  These universal standards replace BDAT
treatment standards in most of the previously promulgated waste
codes and will be used in the future to promulgate treatment
standards for newly listed wastes.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT)
Background Document for Coking Wastes K141-145, K147, and K148"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 868

This background document provides the Agency's rationale and
technical support for selecting the constituents regulated, and
the applicable treatment standards under the Land Disposal
Restrictions program for the K141-K145, K147, and K148 listed
wastes.  This document also provides waste characterization data
that may serve as a basis for determining whether a variance from
the applicable treatment standards is warranted for a particular
type of coking waste that may be more difficult to treat than the
wastes on which the BDAT treatment standards are based.

TITLE: "Final Best Demonstrated Available Technology (BDAT)
Background Document for Newly Listed Wastes K107, K108, K109,
K110, K111, K112, U328, U353, K117, K118, K136, K123, K124, K125,
K126, K131, K132, U359"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 850

This background document provides EPA s rationale and technical
support for selecting the constituents regulated and the
treatment requirements in the universal treatment standards table
under the Land Disposal Restrictions program.  These universal
standards include both methods of treatment and concentration-
based treatment standards.  This document also presents the
following waste-specific information: number and locations of
facilities that may be affected by the land disposal restrictions
for these wastes; the processes generating these wastes; waste 
characterization data; the technologies used to treat these
wastes (or similar wastes; if any); and the treatment performance
data on which the treatment standards are based.

TITLE: "Final Amendments to the Final Best Demonstrated Available
Technology (BDAT) Background Documents for Wastes for Which
Wastewater Treatment Standards Were Determined Based on
Concentrations in Incinerator Scrubber Water: K015, K016, K018,
K019, K020, K023, K024, K028, K030, K048, K049, K050, K051, K052,
K087, K093, K094, U028, U069, U088, U102, U107, and U190"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-963 892

This background document provides EPA s rationale and technical
support for selecting the regulated constituents and the
treatment requirements in the universal treatment standards table
under the Land Disposal Restrictions program.  These universal
standards include both treatment methods and concentration-based
treatment standards.  The Agency is revising the treatment
standards for wastewater forms of the wastes discussed and basing
the treatment standards on available wastewater treatment
performance data rather than concentrations in incinerator
scrubber water.

TITLE: "Cost and Economic Impact Analysis of Land Disposal
Restrictions for Newly Listed Wastes and Contaminated Debris
(Phase I LDRs) Final Rule"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 900

This document contains information from the Regulatory Impact
Analysis (RIA) which the Agency conducted for the Land Disposal
Restrictions Phase I Final Rule published in the Federal Register
on August 18, 1992 (57 FR 37194).  It includes data on the annual
incremental cost of the regulation, and how cost increases could
affect industries; consumers; federal; state and local government
agencies; and geographic regions.  It also addresses how the cost
of the rulemaking will affect employment, investment, innovation,
and/or international trade.

TITLE: "Regulatory Impact Analysis of Land Disposal Restrictions
for Newly Identified Wastes and Hazardous Soil (Phase II LDRs)
Final Rule"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-230 959

This report estimates the costs, economic impacts, and benefits
of the Land Disposal Restrictions (LDRs) for newly identified
wastes and hazardous soil published in the Federal Register on
September 19, 1994 (59 FR 47982).  The document outlines the
wastes affected by the rule, and the  cost and economic impacts
of implementation.

TITLE: "Don t Trash It: Super Fun"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-K-95-005

This document was developed by National Geographic World and EPA. 
It is an activity book which contains puzzles and games that
teach children about landfills and the benefits of waste
minimization and recycling.

TITLE: "Landscaping Products Containing Recovered Materials"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-B-95-003

This document is a list of manufacturers and suppliers of
landscaping products containing recovered materials.  This list
was compiled to facilitate implementation of EPA s Comprehensive
Procurement Guideline and to assist consumers interested in
purchasing and using products containing recovered materials. 
The list provides company names, addresses, phone numbers, and
contacts for additional assistance.

TITLE: "Vehicular Products Containing Recovered Materials"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-B-95-005

This document is a list of manufacturers and suppliers of
vehicular products containing recovered materials.  This list was
compiled to facilitate implementation of EPA s Comprehensive
Procurement Guideline and to assist consumers interested in
purchasing and using products containing recovered materials. 
The list provides company names, addresses, phone numbers, and
contacts for additional assistance.

TITLE: "Parks and Recreation Products Containing Recovered
Materials"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-B-95-007

This document is a list of manufacturers and suppliers of parks
and recreation products containing recovered materials.  This
list was compiled to facilitate implementation of EPA s
Comprehensive Procurement Guideline and to assist consumers
interested in purchasing and using products containing recovered
materials.  The list provides company names, addresses, phone
numbers, and contacts for additional assistance.

TITLE: "Tissue Mills Which Use Postconsumer Recovered Paper"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-B-95-008
 
This document is a list of tissue mills in the United States and
Canada which use postconsumer recovered paper.  This list was
compiled to facilitate implementation of EPA s Comprehensive
Procurement Guideline and to assist consumers interested in
purchasing and using products containing recovered materials. 
The list provides company names, addresses, phone numbers, and
contacts for additional assistance.

TITLE: "Mills Which Produce Newsprint Containing at Least Forty
Percent Postconsumer Recovered Paper"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-B-95-009

This document is a list of mills in United States and Canada
which produce newsprint containing postconsumer recovered paper. 
This list was compiled to facilitate implementation of EPA s
Comprehensive Procurement Guideline and to assist consumers
interested in purchasing and using products containing recovered
materials.  The list provides company names, addresses, phone
numbers, and contacts for additional assistance.

TITLE: "Mills Which Manufacture Printing & Writing Paper,
Computer Paper, Office Paper, Envelopes, Bristols, and Coated
Printing and Writing Papers Using Recovered Paper"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA530-B-95-010

This document is a list of mills in the United States and Canada
which manufacture various types of paper that contain
postconsumer recovered paper.  This list was compiled to
facilitate implementation of EPA s Comprehensive Procurement
Guideline and to assist consumers interested in purchasing and
using products containing recovered materials.  The list provides
company names, addresses, phone numbers, and contacts for
additional assistance.
 
UST

TITLE: "Don't Wait Until 1998: Brief Facts"
AVAILABILITY: Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA510-F-95-002

This brochure summarizes the upgrading requirements for existing
underground storage tanks which are further detailed in the
publication, Don t Wait Until 1998: Spill, Overfill, and
Corrosion Protection for Underground Storage Tanks, EPA510-B-94-
002, also available through the Hotline.

TITLE: "How to Evaluate Alternative Cleanup Technologies for
Underground Storage Tank Sites: A Guide for Corrective Action
Plan Reviewers"
AVAILABILITY: GPO
GPO ORDER NO.: GPO 055-000-00499-4

EPA developed this manual as guidance for state regulators who
evaluate corrective action plans (CAPS) that incorporate
alternative technologies at underground storage tank (UST) sites. 
This revised edition updates the version of the manual published
in October 1994 by adding two new chapters addressing in-situ
groundwater bioremediation and dual-phase extraction.

OTHER

TITLE: "OSWER Environmental Justice Action Agenda: Factsheet"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-963 297

This factsheet provides an overview of the OSWER Environmental
Justice Action Agenda, released in May 1995.  It includes
examples of the partnership OSWER has formed with the public and
program action items.  The factsheet gives details on health and
environmental research; data collection, analysis, and
stakeholder access to information; partnerships, outreach and
communication with stakeholders; Native American, indigenous, and
tribal programs; and the integrating of environmental justice
into all Agency activities.

TITLE: "Waste Programs Environmental Justice Accomplishments
Report: Factsheet"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: PB95-963 298

This factsheet provides an overview of the document Waste
Programs Environmental Justice Accomplishments Report.  A brief
summary of accomplishments in five major areas are listed in the
factsheet.  They include: health initiative; public involvement;
economic redevelopment, jobs, and worker training; contracts and
grants; and partnerships.

TITLE: "Monthly Hotline Report"
AVAILABILITY: NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: See below

Yearly Subscription   PB95-922 400
                 530-R-95-002

January 1995     PB95-922 401
                 530-R-95-002a

February 1995    PB95-922 402
                 530-R-95-002b

March 1995       PB95-922 403
                 530-R-95-002c
 
April 1995       PB95-922 404
                 530-R-95-002d

May 1995         PB95-922 405
                 530-R-95-002e

June 1995        PB95-922 406
                 530-R-95-002f

July 1995        PB95-922 407
                 530-R-95-002g

The reports contain questions that required EPA resolution or
were frequently asked, publications availability, Federal
Register summaries, and Hotline call statistics.

The Monthly Hotline Report Questions and Answers are also
available for downloading at no charge from CLU-IN at (301) 589-
8366.

The complete text of the 1993, 1994, and 1995 Monthly Hotline
Reports may be accessed via the Internet using a gopher.  From
the EPA Core Server at gopher.epa.gov, follow this pathway: EPA
Offices & Regions --> Office of Solid Waste & Emergency Response
--> OSW (RCRA) --> RCRA: General --> RCRA/UST, Superfund & EPCRA
Hotline Reports.
(Note:  Office of Solid Waste, OSW, was renamed Office of Resource Conservation and Recovery, ORCR, on January 18, 2009)

FEDERAL REGISTERS

Final Rules

RCRA

Connecticut; Final Approval of State Underground Storage Tank
Program 
July 5, 1995 (60 FR 34879)

EPA concluded that Connecticut s application for final approval
of its underground storage tank program under Subtitle I of RCRA
satisfies all of the requirements necessary to qualify for final
approval.  As a consequence, EPA intends to grant final approval
to the state to operate its program in lieu of the federal
program.  Final authorization for the program shall be effective
on August 4, 1995. 

Liquids in Landfills: Addition of Test Method to Demonstrate
Sorbent Non-biodegradability 
July 11, 1995 (60 FR 35703)

In 1984, Congress required EPA to promulgate a rule that
prohibited the disposal in hazardous waste landfills of
containerized liquids that had been absorbed in  biodegradable
materials.  EPA has granted a petition to add a third test method
to demonstrated that a sorbent is non-biodegradable.  If
significant adverse comments are received, this direct final rule
will be withdrawn and all public comments received will be
addressed in a subsequent final rule.  This final action will
become effective on September 11, 1995, unless EPA receives
significant adverse comment on the proposal by August 10, 1995.

Arizona; Authorization of State Hazardous Waste Management
Program Revisions 
July 18, 1995 (60 FR 36731)

EPA responded to the comment received on the immediate final rule
published April 11, 1995 (60 FR 18356), and affirmed the Agency s
decision to authorize Arizona s revised RCRA program.  This rule
is effective as of June 12, 1995.

Ohio; Authorization of State Hazardous Waste Management Program
Revisions 
July 27, 1995 (60 FR 38502)

EPA intends to approve revisions to Ohio s hazardous waste
program under RCRA.  Final authorization will be effective
September 25, 1995, unless EPA publishes a prior action
withdrawing this immediate final rule.  Comments must be received
on or before August 26, 1995.

CERCLA

National Priorities List;  Dakhue Sanitary Landfill Superfund
Site 
July 24, 1995 (60 FR 37827)

EPA announced the deletion of the Dakhue Sanitary Landfill Site,
located in Cannon Falls, Minnesota, from the National Priorities
List.  The Agency published a notice of its intent to delete the
site on March 15, 1995 (60 FR 13944).  EPA and the State of
Minnesota have determined that no further cleanup under CERCLA is
appropriate and that remedial actions at the site have been
protective of public health, welfare, and the environment.  The
effective date of this action is July 24, 1995.


PROPOSED RULES

RCRA

Liquids in Landfills: Addition of Test Method to Demonstrate
Sorbent Non-biodegradability 
July 11, 1995 (60 FR 35718)

In 1984, Congress required EPA to promulgate a rule that
prohibited the disposal in hazardous waste landfills of 
containerized liquids that had been absorbed in biodegradable
materials.  EPA has issued a proposed rule to grant a petition to
add a third test method that demonstrates the non-
biodegradability of sorbants.  Written comments must be received
by August 10, 1995.

Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste in the Dye and
Pigment Industries: Extension of Comment Period 
July 17, 1995 (60 FR 36377)

EPA again extended the comment period for the proposed listing
determination on a number of wastes generated during the
production of dyes and pigments, which appeared in the Federal
Register on December 22, 1994 (59 FR 66072).  Comments must now
be received by October 17, 1995.

Hazardous Waste Management System; Testing and Monitoring
Activities 
July 25, 1995 (60 FR 37974)

EPA is proposing to revise certain testing methods and to add
several new testing methods that may be used to comply with the
requirements of Subtitle C of RCRA.  The new and revised methods,
designated as Update III, are proposed to be added to the Third
Edition of Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste,
Physical/Chemical Methods (SW-846).  In addition, EPA is
proposing to delete several obsolete methods from SW-846 and the
RCRA regulations.  Comments must be submitted on or before
September 25, 1995. 

Wyoming; Final Authorization of State Hazardous Waste Management
Program 
July 27, 1995 (60 FR 38537)

EPA has reviewed Wyoming s application for final authorization of
its hazardous waste regulatory program under RCRA and has made
the tentative decision that Wyoming s hazardous waste program
satisfies all of the requirements necessary to qualify for final
authorization.  EPA intends to grant final authorization to the
state to operate its hazardous waste program.  A public hearing
is scheduled for August 29, 1995.  All comments must be received
by August 28, 1995.

CERCLA

National Priorities List; Brown Wood Preserving Superfund Site 
July 6, 1995 (60 FR 35160)

EPA announced its intent to delete the Brown Wood Preserving
Site, located in Live Oak, Florida, from the National Priorities
List.  EPA and the State of Florida have determined that no
further cleanup under CERCLA is appropriate and that remedial
actions at the site have been  protective of public health,
welfare, and the environment.  Comments concerning the proposed
deletion will be accepted through August 7, 1995.

National Priorities List; Stewco, Incorporated Superfund Site 
July 26, 1995 (60 FR 38297)

EPA Region 6 announced its intent to delete the Stewco,
Incorporated Site, located in Waskom, Texas, from the National
Priorities List.  EPA and the State of Texas have determined that
no further cleanup under CERCLA is appropriate and that remedial
actions at the site have been protective of public health,
welfare, and the environment.  Comments concerning the proposed
deletion will be accepted through August 25, 1995.


NOTICES

RCRA

Massachusetts; Adequacy Determination of State/Tribal Municipal
Solid Waste Permit Program 
July 5, 1995 (60 FR 34982)

Pursuant to RCRA 4005(c)(1)(C), EPA has concluded that the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts  municipal solid waste landfill
permitting program meets all of the statutory and regulatory
requirements established by RCRA.  EPA has therefore granted a
final determination of adequacy for all portions of
Massachusetts  municipal solid waste permit program.  The
determination of adequacy for Massachusetts will be effective on
July 5, 1995.  EPA also noted that the Agency intends to propose
a State/Tribal Implementation Rule (STIR).  STIR will provide
procedures by which EPA will approve, or partially approve,
State/Tribal landfill permit programs. 

Organic Air Emission Standards for Tanks, Surface Impoundments,
and Containers 
July 7, 1995 (60 FR 35452)

EPA has issued a notice correcting an error in the December 6,
1994, Subpart CC Federal Register (59 FR 62896).  On page 62912,
in the second column, in the second line,  CESA  should read
CE2A. 

Hazardous Waste Disposal Injection Restrictions; Final Approval
for Case-By-Case Extension 
July 10, 1995 (60 FR 35558)

EPA granted final approval to Great Lakes Chemical Corporation
(Great Lakes) in El Dorado, Arkansas for an additional case-by-
case extension for specific injected  wastes.  The applicant
successfully demonstrated that there was insufficient capacity to
manage its waste and has entered into a binding contractual
commitment to construct or otherwise provide such capacity.  This
approved extension of the LDR effective date becomes effective
June 30, 1995.  

Proposed Consent Decree; Saranac, Michigan Facility 
July 13, 1995 (60 FR 36163)

A Consent Decree in United States v. Lacks Industries, Inc. was
lodged with the U.S. District Court for the District of Michigan
on June 29, 1995.  The proposed decree requires Lacks to comply
with several RCRA provisions, perform corrective action measures,
and pay a $250,000 civil penalty.  DOJ will receive comments for
a period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Proposed Settlement Agreement and Order; Aero Plating Works
Facility 
July 19, 1995 (60 FR 37077)

A proposed Settlement Agreement and Order in United States v.
Maiorano was lodged with the U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of Illinois on July 7, 1995.  The proposed decree
requires the defendants to pay $8,000 into an account that will
be used to pay for the costs of necessary closure activities. 
DOJ will receive comments for a period of 30 days from the date
of publication.

Hazardous Waste Disposal Injection Restrictions; Intent to Grant
a Modification 
July 24, 1995 (60 FR 37892)

EPA has proposed to allow the modification of BP Chemicals,
Inc. s (BPCI) exemption from the LDR ban on disposal of certain
hazardous waste through injection wells for BPCI s site in Lima,
Ohio.  EPA determined with a reasonable degree of certainty that
BPCI s injected wastes will not migrate out of the injection zone
within the next 10,000 years.  Comments will be accepted on or
before September 11, 1995. 

Ash from Municipal Solid Waste Combustion 
July 24, 1995 (60 FR 37896)

EPA announced the availability of the guidance document, Guidance
for the Sampling and Analysis of Municipal Waste Combustion Ash
for the Toxicity Characteristic.  The Agency developed the
guidance to assist generators of ash from municipal solid waste
combustors in determining whether their ash exhibits the toxicity
characteristic. 

Vermont; Adequacy Determination of State/Tribal Municipal Solid
Waste Permit Program 
July 26, 1995 (60 FR 38327)

Pursuant to RCRA 4005(c)(1)(C), EPA gave notice of a tentative
determination, public hearing, and public comment period
concerning the adequacy of Vermont s municipal solid waste
landfill permit program.  Comments must be submitted on or before
August 25, 1995.  If comments reflect significant interest, a
public hearing will be held on October 12, 1995.

RCRA/CERCLA

Proposed Consent Decree; Yellow Water Road Superfund Site 
July 14, 1995 (60 FR 36309)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. American National
Can Company, et al., was lodged on July 5, 1995, with the U.S.
District Court for the Middle District of Florida.  The Consent
Decree provides a covenant not to sue by the United States under
CERCLA 106 and 107 and under 7003 of RCRA in connection with
the Yellow Water Road Superfund Site near Baldwin, Florida.  In
exchange, the settling parties will perform remedial actions at
the site and will reimburse the United States for past and future
costs incurred in relation to the site.  DOJ will receive
comments for a period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Coakley Landfill Superfund Site 
July 20, 1995 (60 FR 37473)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. Coakley Landfill,
Inc., et al., was lodged on July 11, 1995, with the U.S. District
Court for the District of New Hampshire.  Under the proposed
Consent Decree, the defendants will pay $686,927 to the Hazardous
Substances Superfund for past and future response costs incurred
by EPA, $89,261 to DOI for natural resource damages, and $66,212
to the State of New Hampshire for past and future response costs
incurred by the state.  In exchange, the Consent Decree provides
for a covenant not to sue, under 106 and 107 of CERCLA and
7003 of RCRA.  DOJ will receive comments for a period of 30 days
from the date of publication.

CERCLA

Final Policy Toward Owners of Property Containing Contaminated
Aquifers 
July 3, 1995; (60 FR 34790)

EPA announced and published a policy stating the Agency s
position that, subject to certain conditions, where hazardous
substances have come to be located on or in a property solely as
the result of subsurface migration in an  aquifer from a source
or sources outside the property, EPA will not take enforcement
actions against the owner of such property.

Agreements With Prospective Purchasers of Contaminated Property 
July 3, 1995; (60 FR 34792)

EPA announced and published new guidance clarifying when the
Agency will provide a covenant not to sue a prospective purchaser
of contaminated property under CERCLA.  The new guidance, which
supersedes previously published Agency policy toward prospective
purchasers, essentially expands the criteria by which the Agency
will consider entering into prospective purchaser agreements,
while also expanding the universe of eligible sites.  A model
prospective purchaser agreement is included in the new guidance.

Correction to Final Rule; Reportable Quantity Adjustments 
July 10, 1995 (60 FR 35492)

This notice corrects errors in the amendatory language of the
June 12, 1995 final rule which adjusted reportable quantities for
certain hazardous substances under CERCLA (60 FR 30926).

Proposed Consent Decree; Dixiana Superfund Site 
July 13, 1995 (60 FR 36163)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. Monsanto Company,
et al., was lodged on July 3, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the District of South Carolina.  Under the proposed Consent
Decree, the United States has obtained from the defendants
$4,132,837 for past response costs, as well as a commitment for
payment of all of EPA s future oversight costs incurred in
connection with the Dixiana Superfund Site in Lexington County,
South Carolina.  DOJ will receive comments for a period of 30
days from the date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Olin Chemical/McIntosh Plant 
July 14, 1995 (60 FR 36309)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. Olin Corporation
was lodged on July 5, 1995, with the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of Alabama, Southern Division.  This Agreement
would resolve a judicial enforcement action brought by the United
States against Olin Corporation, pursuant to 106 and 107 of
CERCLA, in connection with the Olin Chemical/McIntosh Plant
Superfund Site in McIntosh, Alabama.  Under the proposed Consent
Decree, Olin Corporation has agreed to pay past response costs
and future oversight costs associated with the site, and has
accepted responsibility for further remedial actions.  DOJ will
receive comments for a period of 30 days  from the date of
publication.

National Priorities List; Whidbey Island Seaplane Base Superfund
Site 
July 18, 1995 (60 FR 36770)

EPA Region 10 announced its intent to delete the Whidbey Island
Seaplane Base Site from the National Priorities List.  EPA and
the State of Washington have determined that no further cleanup
under CERCLA is appropriate and that remedial actions at the site
have been protective of public health, welfare, and the
environment.  Comments concerning the proposed deletion will be
accepted through August 17, 1995.

Proposed Consent Decree; Carolawn Superfund Site 
July 19, 1995 (60 FR 37076)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. AAF McQuay, Inc.,
et al., was lodged on June 30, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the District of South Carolina.  Under the proposed Consent
Decree, 30 PRPs (referred to as the  SEPCO Group  ) will pay
$292,500 in response costs associated with the remedial action at
the Carolawn Superfund Site, located near Fort Lawn, South
Carolina.  DOJ will receive comments for a period of 30 days from
the date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Titan Lighting Superfund Site 
July 19, 1995 (60 FR 37076)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. A.O.W. Capitol
Associates, et al., was lodged on July 5, 1995, with the U.S.
District Court for the District of New Jersey.  Under the
proposed Consent Decree, the defendants have agreed to pay the
United States $180,000 for response costs incurred by EPA at the
Titan Lighting Superfund Site in Trenton, New Jersey.  DOJ will
receive comments for a period of 30 days from the date of
publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Dickerson Post Superfund Site 
July 19, 1995 (60 FR 37077)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. Amtreco, Inc., et
al., was lodged on June 14, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the Middle District of Georgia.  Under the proposed Consent
Decree, AT&T Corporation, Western Electric Company, Inc., and Lee
Engineering & Construction Company will pay a total of $140,500
for past response costs incurred in connection with the Dickerson
Post Superfund Site in Clinch County, Georgia.  DOJ will receive
comments for a period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Consent Decree; Maxey Flats Disposal Superfund Site 
July 19, 1995 (60 FR 37078)
 
Two consent decrees in United States v. U.S. Ecology, Inc., et
al., were lodged on June 5, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the Eastern District of Kentucky.  One Consent Decree, the
De Maximus Consent Decree,  provides for the design and
implementation of a remedy for the Maxey Flats Disposal Superfund
Site in Fleming County, Kentucky, and for the reimbursement of
$5.313 million in response costs incurred by EPA.  The second
Consent Decree, the  De Minimis Consent Decree,  provides for the
reimbursement of costs incurred by the United States and certain
private parties in responding to the release and threatened
release of hazardous substances at the site.  DOJ will receive
comments for a period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Blosenski Landfill Superfund Site 
July 20, 1995 (60 FR 37473)

Three proposed consent decrees in United States v. Joseph M.
Blosenski, Jr., et al., were lodged on July 11, 1995, with the
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. 
Each of the proposed Consent Decrees, in conjunction with the
Blosenski Landfill Superfund Site in West Caln Township,
Pennsylvania, requires payment (and in some cases promises of
future work at the site) by the settling parties, in exchange for
resolution of the United States  cost and penalty claims against
those parties.  DOJ will receive comments for a period of 30 days
from the date of publication.

Proposed Settlement Agreement; Hylebos Waterway Problem Areas of
the Commencement Bay Nearshore/Tideflats Superfund Site 
July 20, 1995 (60 FR 37474)

A proposed settlement agreement was lodged on July 11, 1995, with
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of Ohio in In
re SiMETCO, Inc.  The proposed Settlement Agreement settles a
claim relating to costs incurred by EPA at the Hylebos Waterway
Problem Areas of the Commencement Bay Nearshore/Tideflats
Superfund Site in Pierce County, Washington.  Under the proposed
Settlement Agreement, SiMETCO, Inc., will make appropriate
payment in exchange for a covenant not to sue, pursuant to CERCLA
106 and 107, by the United States.  DOJ will receive comments
for a period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Proposed Purchaser Agreement; Middletown Airfield Superfund
Site 
July 24, 1995 (60 FR 37896)

EPA executed a proposed Purchaser Agreement associated with the
Middletown Airfield Superfund Site on June 21, 1995.  The
Purchaser Agreement would resolve certain potential EPA  claims
under 106 and 107 of CERCLA against the prospective  purchaser,
First Industrial Harrisburg, L.P.  The purchaser would be
required to pay $75,000 to the Hazardous Substances Superfund,
provide site access, cooperate fully with response activities,
and exercise due care to protect public health and safety at the
site.  Written comments will be accepted for 30 days from the
date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Lowry Landfill Superfund Site 
July 24, 1995 (60 FR 37903)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. Alumet Partnership,
et al., was lodged on July 10, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the District of Colorado.  The proposed Consent Decree is a
cash-out  decree which requires a payment of $7.28 million and
resolves the United States  cost claims against the Alumet
Partnership in connection with the Lowry Landfill Superfund Site
in Arapahoe County, Colorado.  DOJ will receive comments for a
period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Carolawn Superfund Site 
July 19, 1995 (60 FR 37076)

                     This is an exact duplicate of a
                    notice which appeared on July 19
                             (60  FR 37076)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. AAF McQuay, Inc.,
et al., was lodged on June 30, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the District of South Carolina.  Under the proposed Consent
Decree, 30 PRPs (referred to as the  SEPCO Group  ) will pay
$292,500 in response costs associated with the remedial action at
the Carolawn Superfund Site, located near Fort Lawn, South
Carolina.  DOJ will receive comments for a period of 30 days from
the date of publication.

Proposed Consent Decree; Lowry Landfill Superfund Site 
July 24, 1995 (60 FR 37903)

                     This is an exact duplicate of a
                    notice which appeared on July 24
                             (60  FR 37903)

A proposed consent decree in United States v. Alumet Partnership,
et al., was lodged on July 10, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the District of Colorado.  The proposed Consent Decree is a
cash-out  decree which requires a payment of $7.28 million and
resolves the United States  cost claims against the Alumet
Partnership in connection with the Lowry Landfill Superfund Site
in Arapahoe County, Colorado.  DOJ will receive comments for a
period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Federal Facilities Environmental Restoration Dialogue Committee
Meeting 
July 26, 1995 (60 FR 38327)

EPA announced a public meeting of the Federal Facilities
Environmental Restoration Dialogue Committee to be held August 1-
2, 1995.   The purpose of the meeting is to discuss issues
related to improving the federal facilities environmental
restoration process.  

Proposed Consent Decree 
July 27, 1995 (60 FR 38575)

A proposed Consent Decree in United States v. Terry Shaner, et
al., was lodged on July 10, 1995, with the U.S. District Court
for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.  The proposed Consent
Decree requires the current site owners/operators to do three
things: enter into a Consent Judgement for payment of $50,000
(over time), based on EPA s assessment of their inability to pay
their fair share of response costs; convey a conservation
easement to General Battery Corporation (another signatory to the
Decree); and waive any claims for Takings under the Fifth
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution as well as claims for
statutory relocation benefits.  Under the same Decree, General
Battery Corporation (GBC) has agreed to pay $3,000,000
reimbursement to the Hazardous Substances Superfund and a portion
of EPA s future response costs, as well as $24,000 for natural
resource damages plus up to $10,000 of DOI s future costs.  GBC
is also required to perform certain removal activities and to
protect natural resources at the site.  DOJ will receive comments
for a period of 30 days from the date of publication.

Revised Model CERCLA RD/RA Consent Decree 
July 28, 1995 (60 FR 38817)

EPA published a revised version of the Model CERCLA RD/RA Consent
Decree which supersedes the 1991 interim Model.  The substantive
changes contained in the revised Model Consent Decree are
designed to enhance the fairness and increase the number of
settlements in which PRPs agree to implement government-selected
remedies at Superfund sites. 

ATSDR s Final Criteria for Determining the Appropriateness of a
Medical Monitoring Program Under CERCLA 
July 28, 1995 (60 FR 38840)

The Agency For Toxic Substances Disease Registry announced and
published the criteria to determine when periodic medical testing
to screen people at significant increased risk for disease is
appropriate, as well as requirements for establishing a medical
monitoring programs at CERCLA sites. 


CALL ANALYSIS

Caller Profile

RCRA/UST Hotline

Regulated Community                            5,129
Citizens                                         178
State & Local Govt./Native American              218
Federal Agencies                                 132
Educational Institutions                         120
EPA                                              106
Media                                             13
Interest Groups                                    7
Congress                                           2
International                                      9
Other                                            102
Referrals*                                       377
Transfers to EPCRA/Superfund Hotline*            340
Document Retrieval Line*                         113
Message Retrieval Line*                          758


TOTAL                                          7,604

Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act/Superfund
Hotline

Manufacturers

  Food/Tobacco                                    57
  Textiles                                        38
  Apparel                                         26
  Lumber & Wood                                   31
  Furniture                                       25
  Paper                                           39
  Printing & Publishing                           39
  Chemicals                                      165
  Petroleum & Coal                                56
  Rubber & Plastics                               42
  Leather                                         33
  Stone, Clay & Glass                             62
  Primary Metals                                  55
  Fabricated Metals                               64
  Machinery (Excluding Electrical)                61
  Electrical & Electronic Equipment               22
  Transportation Equipment                        61
  Instruments                                     29
  Misc. Manufacturing                            279
  
  Subtotal                                     1,184
  
  Consultants/Engineers                        2,538
  Attorneys                                      309
  Citizens                                       233
  Public Interest Groups                          24
  Educational Institutions                        73
  EPA                                             60
  Federal Agencies                               151
  GOCOs                                           11
  Congress                                         3
  State Officials/SERCs                           78
  Local Officials/LEPCs                          133
  Fire Departments                                16
  Hospitals/Laboratories                          35
  Trade Associations                              22
  Union/Labor                                      0
  Farmers                                          2
  Distributors                                    11
  Insurance Companies                              4
  Media/Press                                     14
  Native Americans                                 0
  International                                    1
  Other                                          125
  Referrals*                                     271
  Transfers to RCRA/UST Hotline*                 361
  Document Retrieval Line*                         0
  Message Retrieval Line*                      1,054
  
  TOTAL                                        6,713
  
  Hotline Topics
  
  RCRA
  
  RCRA GENERAL                                 1,023
  SUBTITLE C
  Hazardous Waste Id. - General             1,314(1)
    Toxicity Characteristic (TC)                 175
    Wood Preserving Wastes                        39
    Listing of Used Oil                           73
    Fluff                                          0
    Mercury-Containing Lamps                  330(1)
  Radioactive Mixed Waste                         21
  Delisting Petitions                             17
  Hazardous Waste Recycling                   695(1)
  Generators                                  928(1)
  Small Quantity Generators                      237
  Transporters                                    73
  Exports/Imports                                 21
  TSDF General                                504(1)
    Treatment                                     99
    Storage                                       65
    Disposal                                      87
    Siting Facilities                             11
    Capacity                                      17
  Land Disposal Restrictions                  766(1)
  Permits and Permitting                         175
  Corrective Action                              213
  Liability/Enforcement                          143
  Test Methods                                   141
  Health Effects                                  20
  Combustion - General                           176
    Permitting                                    18
    Tech. Standards/Combustion Units              29
    Waste Minimization                            57
    Risk Assessment                                7
  Waste Minimization/Pollution Prevention         74
  State Programs                                 103
  Hazardous Waste Data                            55
  Military Munitions                              18
  SUBTITLE D
  Household Hazardous Wastes                     202
  Subtitle D - General                        232(1)
  Siting Facilities                                6
    Combustion                                    30
  Industrial Waste                                35
  Solid Waste Recycling - General             299(1)
    Aluminum                                      15
    Batteries                                     22
    Glass                                         11
    Paper                                         47
    Plastics                                      37
    Tires                                         21
    Used Oil                                     113
  Composting                                      62
  Markets - General                               24
    Aluminum                                       4
    Batteries                                     33
    Compost                                       14
    Glass                                          2
    Paper                                         13
    Plastics                                       8
    Tires                                          6
    Used Oil                                      34
  Procurement General                         139(1)
    Building Insulation                            9
    Cement/Cement Products with Fly Ash            7
    Paper and Paper Products                      82
    Re-Refined Lubricating Oil                    19
    Retread Tires                                  7
  Source Reduction/Pollution Prevention           33
  Grant and Financing                              7
  OTHER WASTES
  Ash                                             20
  Bevill Amendment (Mining Waste)                 23
  Medical Waste                                  104
  Oil and Gas                                     11
  
  TOTAL                                       9,455*
  * Includes 2,655 RCRA document requests.
  
  
  UST
  
  General/Misc.                               169(1)
  Applicability/Definitions                       86
  Regulated Substances                            26
  Standards for New Tank Systems                  29
  Tank Standards and Upgrading                    86
  Operating Requirements                          12
  Release Detection                               69
  Release Reporting & Investigation               25
  Corrective Action for USTs                     129
  Out-of-Service/Closure                          98
  Financial Responsibility                        33
  State Programs                                  27
  Liability/Enforcement                           26
  LUST Trust Fund                                 13
   
  TOTAL                                         828*
  * Includes 923 UST document requests.
  
  EMERGENCY PLANNING AND COMMUNITY RIGHT-TO-KNOW Hotline
  
  General:
    General Title III Questions               528(1)
    Trade Secrets                                 10
    Enforcement                                   46
    Liability/Citizen Suits                       12
    Training                                       4
    Chemical-Specific Information                 29
  
  Emergency Planning (301-303):
    General                                       64
    Notification Requirements                     31
    SERC/LEPC Issues                              79
    EHSs/TPQs                                     60
    Risk Communication/
      Hazards Analysis                            39
    Exemptions                                     9
  Emergency Release Notification (304):
    General                                       58
    Notification Requirements                     45
    Reportable Quantities                         76
    CERCLA 103 vs. SARA 304                     58
    ARIP/AHEDB/ERNS                                3
    Exemptions                                    10
  Hazardous Chemical Reporting
  (311-312):                                      
    General                                       60
    MSDS Reporting Requirements                   38
    Tier I/II Requirements                       121
    Thresholds                                    33
    Hazard Categories                             10
    Mixtures Reporting                            17
    Exemptions                                    32
  Toxic Chemical Release Inventory (313):
    General                                   724(1)
    Reporting Requirements                    715(1)
     Thresholds                               239(1)
    Form R Completion                       1,207(1)
    Supplier Notification                         93
    NOTEs/NOSEs/NONs                              61
    Voluntary Revisions                          487
    Pollution Prevention 33/50                    15
    Public Access to Data                        103
    TRI Database                                  63
    Petitions                                    277
    TRI Expansion                                235
    Exemptions                                205(1)
  Special Topics:
    CAA 112
       General                                 34(1)
       RMPs                                    49(1)
       List of Regulated Substances               17
    Federal Facilities Executive Order            88
  
  TOTAL                                        6,084
  *Includes 1,835 Emergency Planning and Community
  Right-to-Know document requests
  
  
  SUPERFUND
  
  General/Misc.                                  205
  Access & Information Gathering                  46
  Administrative Improvements                       
    General                                      157
    Environmental Justice/Brownfields         194(1)
    SACM/Presumptive Remedies                    121
    Soil Screening Levels                         63
  Administrative Record                           15
  ARARs                                          133
  CERCLIS                                        103
  Citizen Suits                                    9
  Claims Against Fund                              8
  Clean-Up Costs                                  40
  Clean-Up Standards                              77
  Community Involvement                           53
  Contract Lab Program (CLP)                      15
  Contractor Indemnification                       9
  Contracts                                       15
  Definitions                                     28
  Enforcement                                     57
  Federal Facilities                              26
  Hazardous Substances                           123
  HRS                                             15
  Liability                                      106
  Local Gov't Reimbursement                       29
  Natural Resource Damages                        25
  NCP                                             70
  Notification                                    76
  NPL                                         175(1)
  Off Site Rule                                   16
   OSHA                                            5
  PA/SI                                           20
  PRPs                                            96
  RD/RA                                           25
  Reauthorization                                 23
  Remedial                                       121
  Removal                                         55
  RI/FS                                           46
  Risk Assess./Health Effects                     55
  ROD                                             42
  RQ                                          536(1)
  Settlements                                     29
  SITE Program                                    27
  State Participation                              6
  State Program                                   13
  TAGs                                             2
  Taxes                                           10
  
  Special Topics
    Oil Pollution Act                              2
    SPCC Regulations                              10
    Radiation Site Cleanup                        45
  
                                                    
  TOTAL                                       3,127*
  *Includes 942 Superfund document requests.
  
  
  
  
  TOTAL HOTLINE QUESTIONS, DOCUMENT
  REQUESTS AND REFERRALS:                     19,494
   
   
   (1) Hot topics for this month
   Topics are calculated as the summation of all questions
   received by the Hotline.  A single call may result in
   multiple questions.
  
