THIRTEEN KSC WORKERS EARN PRESTIGIOUS SILVER SNOOPY AWARD



Amber Marek                                                            
                                                      May 26, 2004
Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
(Phone:  321/867-2468)



KSC Release No. 34-04

Thirteen KSC Workers Earn Prestigious Silver Snoopy Award  

Thirteen civil service and contractor employees at Kennedy Space 
Center, Fla., recently were presented with NASA's prestigious Silver 
Snoopy Award for service to Space Shuttle astronauts. The award was 
created by the astronauts to honor people who contribute most to the 
safety and success of human space flight.



Civil Service employee Charles L. Davis of the Spaceport Services 
Directorate was honored with the award.



Contractor employees honored were: Christopher D. Vaughn, Larry Carr, 
Wanda J. Rucker and Edward L. Coyle of Space Gateway Support; Daniel 
R. Sweety, Ed Simpson, Christine Layne, William Voigt and Julie 
Anderson with The Boeing Company NASA Systems; Mary A. Neville of 
ASRC Aerospace Corporation; and Paul A. Hollis and Kelvin L. Polk 
with United Space Alliance.



Astronaut Butch Wilmore presented awards to Davis, Simpson, Anderson, 
Voigt, Layne, Neville and Hollis; astronaut Bob Behnken presented to 
Polk and Sweety; and astronaut Doug Hurley presented to Carr, Coyle, 
Rucker and Vaughn.



Snoopy, of the comic strip "Peanuts," has been the unofficial mascot 
of NASA's astronaut corps since the earliest days of human space 
flight.



The award is presented to no more than 1 percent of the Space Center's 
workforce each year. Recipients are given a silver pin depicting the 
famous beagle wearing a space suit. All the pins have flown on a 
previous Space Shuttle mission. The awardees also receive a framed 
certificate and a congratulatory letter signed by the presenting 
astronaut.

	
-end-
