{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\nowidctlpar\f0\fs24 October 27, 2005\par
\par
Susan Hayward\par
97 Jamestowne Way, Unit 65\par
Taylors, SC 29687\par
\par
Food and Drug Administration\par
Division of Documents Management (HFA-305)\par
Docket No. 2005N-0404\par
5630 Fishers Lane\par
Room 1061\par
Rockville, MD 20852\par
\par
RE: Public Comment AGAINST Gonadotroptin Agonist Testing in Disorders of Puberty\par
       DOCKET NUMBER 2005N-0404\par
\par
Dear Sir/Madam:\par
\par
Please accept this letter as formal opposition to the proposed above-mentioned medical study at the University of Chicago Hospitals General Clinical Research Facility.  I base my decision on personal experience as a former consumer of the drug Lupron, study of it\rquote s effects on other patients, how the manufacturer conducts business, their history of legal and political maneuvers, and experiences with the medical community.  \par
\par
It is my understanding that the FDA position on the Lupron Issue is that there are no viable alternatives for treatments.  I would hope your agency would focus as much time, money and effort on prevention as you do study.  Why is there such a high incidence of  hormonal disorders like precocious puberty and endometriosis?  After looking at this issue for many years, I have come to the conclusion that our answers lie in the food supply.  That would explain why formula manufacturers (one of them being Abbott Laboratories, the manufacturer of Similac, and also the partner corporation producing Lupron), and the National Cattlemen\rquote s Beef Association would both have such a vested interest in the American Academy of Pediatrics.  As long as the medical community is benefitting from these organizations, you can expect promotion and tolerance of any products whether they be safe for consumers or not, and a hands off approach to criticism.  The American Public deserves better than influence peddling, and our children need protection.  I invite you to review the attachments documenting my allegations.\par
\par
I didn\rquote t start out as an outspoken critic of the pharmaceutical industry, but circumstances forced me to educate myself about my situation when the medical community refused to diagnose my syndrome.  You don\rquote t become a mechanic when you need your car repaired, but hundreds and perhaps thousands of former Lupron patients are being forced into medical research in order to diagnose themselves with rare diseases such as Hashimoto\rquote s Encephilitus,  Autoimmune Inner Ear Disease, Grave\rquote s Disease, Lupus, etc. Often, we patients get misdiagnosed with something simple like allergies or junk diagnosis of chronic fatigue and fibromyalgia.  We become disabled and lose our quality of life as we knew it, financially, familial and socially.  Most of us are too sick to fight and become shut ins.  We have lost our voice on the internet because websites have been purchased by corporations who hire moderators that silence us.  The lack of response to the upcoming deadline for public comments is a testimony to how good a job they have done in keeping us from being vocal.  The National Lupron Victims Network had over 1 million hits before it was taken down mysteriously a few years ago.  Where did the members go?  Did they get well again?  I didn\rquote t, so I would think they are ill.  The FDA had many thousands of Adverse Condition Reports on file for Lupron prompting the black box relabelling.  Don\rquote t they have any place in your decision to inject this drug into children?  Why fill out forms if they get ignored?\par
\par
Allow me to give you my opinion on the whole matter of Lupron.  I believe Taketa and Abbott Labs formed TAP as a hedge for future lawsuits, thereby protecting the parent companies.  TAP can go out of business when the truth about Lupron finally catches up with them, and Taketa/Abbott both walk away after making billions in profits.  I must commend their lawyers because it was a brilliant move.  This country has a history of product liability where the manufacturer is forced into bankruptcy, so the incorporation of TAP was a very smart business decision as profits can be siphoned off to the parent company.\par
\par
May I remind you that TAP has a history of fraudulent activity and holds the record in this country for the highest fine levied against a drug manufacturer.  There was widespread corruption with employees, and doctors were bribed with free samples billable to patients and insurance companies along with other perks.  My former gynocologist was a researcher and accepted money from TAP to fund his work.  Do you think he had my best interests at heart?  Which side do you think he\rquote d join, mine or TAP\rquote s?  Allow me answer that for you.  He chose TAP.  He saw I had an abnormal thyroid test while on Lupron and instead of notifying me as suggested by the lab, he filed it.  His strategy to avoid a lawsuit was successful because the statute of limitations passed before I could prove a case, similar most patient's legal problem.  The patients who do file suit generally have the record sealed at TAP\rquote s request making it more difficult for other claimants to obtain documents.  The lawyers take most of the proceeds of settled cases in fees and expenses, leaving patients with destroyed lives and little or no compensation. \par
\par
This legal dilemma creates a climate where patients are viewed as adversaries because the doctors pay the price for lawsuits in the form of higher malpractice insurance rates.   The doctors and their professional associations side with the drug manufacturers,  and the patients get classed on the side of lawyers who take advantage of them.  We lose on all fronts; not only are we ill but we can't get the support of our doctors to diagnose and treat us.  My only option is to cry out a warning to other people who may use this drug.  There are many more issues I could expand on and give you examples of how the media has been manipulated and how paid lobbyists control politicians, etc., but  I believe you understand my point.  \par
\par
Pub Med 14558924 published in Thyroid 8/13/03 makes this recommendation "All patients who are to receive GnRH analogue therapy should be examined for antithyroid antibodies and family history of autoimmune thyroid disease, and should be followed accordingly."  The Journal of Pediatrics countered this conclusion by claiming it was an iscolated case.  I disagree and am living proof that the conclusion was correct in PMID 14558924.  The doctor could have just asked, is there a history of thyroid issues in your family?  My mother had a thyroid condition and that would have eliminated me as a prospective patient.  Isn't that the root of the problem, money?  If TAP loses a market share to people with a family history of autoimmune problems their profits may be reduced?   Should the medical societies devulge the truth do they get retalliation in the form of less donations for their own agenda? \par
\par
This brings me to what I want from you, and that\rquote s to rethink injecting WELL children as a control group with this drug.  Lupron is dangerous and TAP has not been forthcoming with information about this drug.  Until they demonstrate a more open approach in the way they conduct business, I think it\rquote s a huge mistake to use children as test subjects.  The package inserts are evasive; referring to other inserts and purposely downplaying the risks.  I look at the parent\rquote s guide TAP distributes and it discloses very little.  On page 7 of the Lupron PED insert it says, \ldblquote Discontinuation of Lupron Depot\endash Ped should be considered before age 11 for females and age 12 for males\rdblquote .  Why isn\rquote t that in the parent\rquote s guide?  Are they expected to wade through 7 pages of pharmacology in order to figure out the child shouldn\rquote t be taking it anymore?  I\rquote ve seen these kids on Lupron until 14.  There are Pub-Med Studies showing the bone loss so severe that screws had to be inserted to support the hip, but they continued Lupron.  What are the doctors getting out of this drug that they are so pro-Lupron?  Why aren\rquote t we getting alternatives to such a dangerous drug?   Can you imagine what it feels like for a parent to discover they gave their child something that made them very ill?  There is an over emphasis on a reduction of side effects once the drug wears off, but it's not true in many cases like my own.  The changes Lupron makes are permanent in many cases, and we are being ignored.\par
\par
One area I really want to bring your attention to is depression.  Lupron induces severe depression in most patients.  On page 16 of the Lupron Depot 3.75 Package Insert (note that it's page 16 of 18) under Postmarketing it says, mood swings, suicidal ideation and ATTEMPT.  These are REPORTED adverse events.   How are children going to be safe when they are so young most won\rquote t even be diagnosed for depression that early?  The ones who do go on to develop the autoimmune problems that are downplayed in the same Postmarketing section under Localized Reactions, have only one method of treatment according to the latest studies,  prednisone.  Anyone familiar with prednisone knows these patients are highly susceptible to mood swings.   When you compound the psychological aspects with the treatment of autoimmune problems, it\rquote s a huge challenge to manage.  \par
\par
The reason this Lupron issue has always been so personal to me when it comes to children is because I know the memory loss that occurs first hand.  These children will never have the chance at a normal education using this drug.  I describe the loss like holes in Swiss Cheese, some long-term, some short.  It takes years for all the diseases and conditions to be discovered.  The damage to the endocrine system is permanent for many people, and their lives and occupations are destroyed.  It happened to me when I was 37 and I had a chance to live a little before the problems.  How can this be allowed to happen to innocent children?  I can\rquote t.  I have to speak out because it will be on my conscience the rest of my life if I don\rquote t defend them.  If you had a child who was sick, could you live with yourself that the treatment did more harm than good?  Wouldn't you be angry if you found out all it would have taken was a blood test or medical history to avoid it?\par
\par
Over and over the package inserts say no study was done.  Why is it that new studies are funded, but never follow up long-term with people who took the drug?  Page 2 of the 3.75 insert says \ldblquote No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interations studies have been conducted with Lupron Depot.\rdblquote    Instead they offer an assumption based on science as an explanation.  Why?  How long have they been injecting men and women and they still have no idea how other drugs react with it?  Out of the billions in profit they\rquote ve made they couldn\rquote t send out a questionnaire?   We have no idea how many people got sick from Lupron out of the millions of injections because nobody asks.  There is no financial incentive for TAP to do studies on anything but new markets.  Are you aware they are giving Lupron to children for autism?  I suspect this is why there\rquote s a push to get the precocious puberty off-label use sanctioned, because the next step will be the autism emerging market.  Who is minding the store?  Who is watching out for us?  These are people\rquote s lives being destroyed.  Without Lupron, what happens?  The NLVN said the kids eventually end up the same without the drug.  Why poison them in the process?    Can\rquote t TAP get more than 22 children (page 2 PED insert) to study who took the Lupron than recruiting healthy children as a control?  Why not ask how those 22 kids are doing now before experimenting with more people?  It just doesn\rquote t make any sense to me.\par
\par
I\rquote ve done my best to make my point that there\rquote s more involved here than just treating a childhood problem.  Physicians need more education than a sales rep\rquote s marketing plan to stop further abuses with this drug.  Patients can\rquote t get the care they need because doctors don\rquote t realize what kinds of problems we suffer.  I\rquote ve had arthritus for years and still test negative.  My x-rays show the arthritus but Lupron causes a chameleon type of syndrome from fluctuations in the thryoid, pituitary and hypothalmus.  I have no medical background, so it\rquote s very difficult for me to explain.  All I know is I have conditions like gout that test negative, but the minute I eat shellfish my ankle swells.  I test negative for lupus, but have had fluid draining out of my ear for 4 years and the swollen eustacian tubeonly improves with prednisone.  Is it possible I have some form of silent lupus?  Autoimmune ear disease has an incidence of 200 out of 1,000,000 so it's extremely rare.  The only doctor who can diagnose me is in another state and there are very few of these specialists in the entire country.  What I'm saying is that I am still looking for answers to the damage Lupron caused several years later.   I manage so many diseases and conditions now that I stopped counting at 10, but 14 years ago I had 1 and that was endometriosis.  The financial cost of my disability is over $1,000,000 in lost wages and productivity.  Imagine what the cost of medical care is on top of that, not to mention quality of life issues.  All of this could have been avoided had my doctor made a choice that my family medical history put me at risk for complications due to Lupron.  Are you willing to create a whole new generation of sufferers with this study, especially children who don't have the condition being treated? \par
\par
Hopefully you will consider what I\rquote m trying to convey and think of those precious children and their parents when making your decision.  My hope is that the problems I faced will somehow help others when they become ill and can\rquote t find answers.  I will never give up trying to regain my health or the ambition of being able to function again.  It\rquote s a terribly lonely predicament to be a prisoner in a sick body, withdrawn from the world, and never receiving compensation for a drug company\rquote s lies and legal manipulation.  TAP knows the truth, and now you do too.  My wish is that the spirit of the Lord guide you in your decision.\par
\par
Respectfully,\par
\tab\par
\par
\par
\par
Susan Hayward\par
\par
SH/\par
\par
Exhibits: I.  Non-Profit Organizations Receiving Corporate Funding\par
             II. Pub-Med ID #15001954\par
\tab III. Journal of Pediatrics Response to PMID #15001954\par
   \tab IV. Pub-Med ID #14558924\par
\tab  V. Pub-Med ID #11228054\par
\tab VI. Pub-Med ID #9230649\par
           VII. A Parent's Guide To Precocious Puberty\par
          VIII. Lupron Depot-Ped Package Insert\par
             IX. Lupron Depot 3.75 Package Insert\par
\par
\par
Exhibit I.\par
\par
\trowd\trgaph10\trleft-10\trbrdrt\brdrdb\brdrw5 \trbrdrb\brdrdb\brdrw5 \trpaddl10\trpaddr10\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clvertalc\cellx8990\pard\intbl\sb100\sa100\cf1\b Non-Profit Organizations Receiving Corporate Funding\cf0\b0  \cell\row\pard\sb100\sa100\par
\trowd\trgaph10\trleft-10\trpaddl10\trpaddr10\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clvertalc\cellx8540\pard\intbl\sb100\sa100{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "/integrity/nonprofits/index.html"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul Index of Non-Profit Organizations Receiving Corporate Funding}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24\cell\row\trowd\trgaph10\trleft-10\trpaddl10\trpaddr10\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clvertalc\cellx8540\pard\intbl\sb100\sa100\line\b AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS\b0\line\cell\row\trowd\trgaph10\trleft-10\trpaddl10\trpaddr10\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clvertalc\cellx8540\pard\intbl\sb100\sa100\ldblquote Friends of Children Fund\rdblquote  Annual Report, July 1, 1996 - June 30, 1997, indicates $2.085 million in funding from corporations. Donors include Procter & Gamble, Gerber, Infant Formula Council, McNeil Consumer Products Company, National Cattlemen\rquote s Beef Association, Johnson & Johnson Consumer Products, Abbott Laboratories, Wyeth-Lederle Vaccine & Pediatrics, Mead Johnson Nutritionals, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Schering Corp., Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Food Marketing Institute, Sugar Association, International Food Information Council, Merck Vaccine Division, and others.\par
Formula manufacturers \ldblquote donate $1 million annually to the American Academy of Pediatrics in the form of a renewable grant that has already netted the AAP $8 million. The formula industry also contributed at least $3 million toward the building costs of the AAP headquarters.\rdblquote  (Mothering magazine, July-August, p.60; refers to a book \i Milk, Money and Madness\i0  by Naomi Baumslag and Dia L. Michels (Westport, Conn.: Bergin and Garvey, 1995, p. 172))\par
According to a New York Times article, the Ross Products Unit of Abbott Laboratories, the maker of Similac infant formula, purchased 300,000 copies of the AAP\rquote s \ldblquote New Mother\rquote s Guide to Breastfeeding\rdblquote  with Ross\rquote  logo and name on them. In addition, \ldblquote Ross, McNeil and Johnson & Johnson were the top three corporate supporters of the academy\rquote s $65 million operating budget...each giving $500,000 or more.\rdblquote  (New York Times, 9/18/02, C1)\cell\row\pard\sb100\sa100\line EXHIBIT II.\par
\b\fs28 Autoimmune thyroiditis during leuprolide acetate treatment.\b0\fs24\line\line{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Eyal+O%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Eyal O}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Rose+SR%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Rose SR}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 .\line\line Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. Susan.Rose@cchmc.org\line\line Autoimmune thyroiditis developed in a 9-year-old girl with precocious puberty approximately 8 months after initiation of Leuprolide acetate therapy. In addition, gonadotropin concentrations as measured by radioimmunoassay appeared high. Treatment with levothyroxine, in addition to continued Leuprolide acetate treatment, resolved gonadotropin elevation and hypothyroidism.\line\line Publication Types: \par
\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sb100\sa100{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "javascript:AL_get(this, 'ptyp', 'Case Reports');"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul Case Reports}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24\par
\pard\sb100\sa100\line PMID: 15001954 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE] \par
\par
EXHIBIT III.\par
\pard\keepn\sb100\sa100\kerning36\b\fs48 The role of leuprolide acetate therapy in triggering auto-immune thyroiditis\par
\pard\brdrb\brdrdb\brdrw5\brdrcf3 \sb100\sa100\qc\kerning0\b0\v\f1\fs16 Top of Form 1\par
\pard\sb100\sa100\v0\f0\fs24{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l """}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul Michael Haller}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24 , MD, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l """}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul Desmond Schatz}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24 , MD\par
\pard\brdrt\brdrdb\brdrw5\brdrcf3 \sb100\sa100\qc\v\f1\fs16 Bottom of Form 1\par
\pard\keepn\sb100\sa100\b\v0\f0\fs28 Article Outline\par
\pard\sb100\sa100\b0\fs24\bullet  {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l "bibliography""}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul References}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24\par
\bullet  {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l """}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul Copyright}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24\par
\i To the Editor:\i0\par
We read with interest the report by Eyal and Rose regarding the occurrence of autoimmune hypothyroidism in a 9-year-old girl with precocious puberty who was treated with the gonadaropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist, leuprolide acetate, for approximately 8 months.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l "bib1""}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul 1}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24  From this single case report, the authors suggested an association of leuprolide acetate with autoimmune thyroiditis and recommended thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) screening before and 6 to 8 months into treatment. We believe the authors' conclusions are overstated.\par
The authors suggest that autoimmune disease is \ldblquote related to potential immunostimmulatory properties of GnRH agonists independent of gonadal steroids,\rdblquote  as stated in the paper. The reference cited in support of the authors' suggestion states \ldblquote there is little evidence for direct immune actions of gonadatropins\rdblquote  and \ldblquote it appears that the studies demonstrating immunostimulatory properties of GnRH were done exclusively in female rats.\rdblquote{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l "bib2""}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul 2}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24  No other accompanying organ specific or non-organ specific autoimmune disorders were reported. In the case presented, there was no documentation of autoantibody status before the start of leuoprolide therapy. In addition, the patient had a sibling with primary hypothyroidism and a family member with type I diabetes (T1DM). Clustering of autoimmune thyroid disease in families is well described.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l "bib3""}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul 3-5}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24  Furthermore, relatives of patients with T1DM have a much higher incidence of thyroid autoimmunity (up to 25%).{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\l "bib6""}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul 6}}}\cf0\ulnone\f0\fs24  When added to the significant female to male predominance of thyroid disease, it is likely that these factors played a much more significant role in the patient's development of thyroid disease than leuprolide acetate therapy.\par
Based on this single case report, we therefore disagree with the suggestion that leuprolide acetate treatment requires thyroid screening. The use of primary autoantibody screening vs primary thyroid function screening also must be addressed. Screening always involves additional cost and, often, additional stress. Well-designed studies should be conducted before such recommendations are made. Outside a research setting, patients should be screened for autoimmune thyroid disease only on the basis of well-established risk factors and clinical presentation.\par
\par
EXHIBIT IV.\par
\b\fs28 Possible induction of Graves' disease and painless thyroiditis by gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues.\b0\fs24\line\line{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Amino+N%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Amino N}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Hidaka+Y%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Hidaka Y}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Takano+T%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Takano T}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Tatsumi+KI%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Tatsumi KI}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Izumi+Y%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Izumi Y}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Nakata+Y%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Nakata Y}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 .\line\line Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan. namino@labo.med.osaka-u.ac.jp\line\line Prolonged administration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues induce a decrease in serum estrogen level, which may aggravate subclinical or mild autoimmune thyroid disease. Two patients developed Graves' thyrotoxicosis in association with an increase in anti-thyrotropin (TSH) receptor antibody activities at 4 months after initiation of buserelin acetate. GnRH analogue therapy was discontinued at the time of diagnosis but it took more than 2 years of methimazole therapy to obtain remission of Graves' disease. Another patient developed painless thyroiditis in association with an increase in antithyroid microsomal antibodies at 4 months after initiation of leuprolide acetate. These results indicate that GnRH analogues possibly induce clinical onset of Graves' thyrotoxicosis or destruction-induced thyrotoxicosis. Clinicians should be aware of this phenomenon. All patients who are to receive GnRH analogue therapy should be examined for antithyroid antibodies and family history of autoimmune thyroid disease, and should be followed accordingly.\par
\par
EXHIBIT V.\line\par
\b\fs28 Transient thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism following administration of the GnRH agonist leuprolide acetate.\b0\fs24\line\line{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Kasayama+S%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Kasayama S}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Miyake+S%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Miyake S}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Samejima+Y%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Samejima Y}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 .\line\line Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita-city, Japan.\line\line A 45-year-old women with chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura was given monthly injections of the GnRH agonist leuprolide acetate for the treatment of uterine leiomyoma. Two weeks after the fifth injection, she showed mild symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. At that time, serum thyroxin (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) levels were elevated whereas TSH level was suppressed. Anti-thyroglobulin (anti-Tg) and anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) antibodies were positive, whereas TSH binding inhibitory immunoglobulin (TBII) was undetectable. Two months later, serum T4 and T3 levels spontaneously decreased below the normal ranges. Five months after the onset of the disease, they returned to normal without any treatment. Anti-TPO and anti-Tg antibodies gradually decreased during the clinical course. Thus, the present case was indicated to be an instance wherein silent thyroiditis developed after leuprolide acetate administration. This is the first report to demonstrate the association of thyroid disorder with leuprolide injection.\par
\par
EXHIBIT VI.\line\par
\b\fs28 Anxiety and mood disorders associated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist therapy.\b0\fs24\line\line{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Warnock+JK%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Warnock JK}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 , {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Search&term=%22Bundren+JC%22%5BAuthor%5D"}}{\fldrslt{\cf2\ul\b Bundren JC}}}\cf0\ulnone\b0\f0\fs24 .\line\line Department of Psychiatry, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center at Tulsa 74129-1077, USA.\line\line Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists are synthetic derivatives of the native decapeptide produced by the hypothalamus. These agents cause a reversible suppression of the synthesis and release of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) by the anterior pituitary gland. With GnRH agonist therapy, there is a resulting loss of endogenous ovarian gonadotropin stimulation and a severe hypo-estrogen state consistent with castrate levels of estrogen. Recently, GnRH agonists such as leuprolide and goserelin have been noted to be effective in treating mild to severe endometriosis. Side effects of these agents are consistent with the physiological effects of ovarian suppression, such as vasomotor instability, vaginal dryness, and headaches. However, despite some reports of emotional lability as an adverse effect of GnRH agonists, it appears that the occasional, rather severe psychiatric consequences of these agents are underappreciated. In this article, we present the case reports of 4 women of reproductive age with no prior psychiatric history who were treated with a GnRH agonist for endometriosis. These women developed symptoms consistent with various psychiatric disorders, including panic disorder and major depression with and without psychotic features. Three of these patients were given sertraline while on GnRH agonist therapy, which improved their mood and anxiety symptoms. Women undergoing GnRH agonist therapy may provide a model with which to investigate mood disorders during the perimenopausal stage of life.\par
\par
EXHIBIT VII.\line\par
A PARENT\rquote S \par
GUIDE \par
TO \par
PRECOCIOUS \par
PUBERTY \par
LUPRON DEPOT-PED\'ae \par
LEUPROLIDE ACETATE FOR DEPOT SUSPENSION \par
\par
INTRODUCTION \par
All children develop body changes at puberty, but sometimes these normal changes occur \par
too soon. This condition is called \ldblquote precocious puberty.\rdblquote  It should be evaluated and \par
probably treated. A child who has the normal teenage-type growth spurt too soon will \par
also stop growing too soon and will not be as tall an adult as he or she could have been. \par
Also, these children are often embarrassed and confused by their early development; this \par
could lead to social difficulties. \par
WHAT IS PRECOCIOUS \par
PUBERTY? \par
Precocious puberty occurs when girls under the age of 8 or boys under the age of 9 begin \par
to develop signs of sexual maturity. This happens to about one child in every 5,000 to \par
10,000. \par
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS \par
\'01 Girls develop breasts and may have monthly periods. \par
\'01 The penis and testicles of boys grow larger. \par
\'01 Behavior may change; children may become aggressive or moody. \par
\'01 Pubic hair grows in both sexes. \par
\'01 Children may have oily skin and/or acne. \par
\'01 Your child may be the tallest in the class; there is a sudden growth spurt like that usually \par
seen in teenagers. \par
WHY DOES IT HAPPEN? \par
In most cases, there is no special reason for your child\rquote s early development. It is not \par
caused by anything we do and is not necessarily passed on from parents to children. \par
However, there may be some physical problem, like a tumor, causing precocious puberty; \par
this would require other treatment. Your doctor will perform tests to rule out some \par
possible physical causes. \par
HOW WILL \par
LUPRON DEPOT-PED\'ae HELP? \par
Lupron Depot-PED is a hormone-like agent. It is given by injection once a month to \par
adjust your child\rquote s body clock. \par
\'01 Your child will stop making some hormones at adult levels. \par
\'01 Pubertal changes (pubic hair, girl\rquote s period, breasts, etc.) should stop and may even \par
become less obvious. \par
\'01 Growth rate becomes more normal. \par
\'01 When it\rquote s right for your child, your doctor will stop administering the shots and puberty \par
will begin again. \par
REGULAR INJECTIONS \par
ARE IMPORTANT! \par
For best results, your child should have the right amount of Lupron Depot-PED in his or \par
her body at all times. If you miss a shot or are a week late, your child\rquote s pubertal \par
development could begin again. \par
STAY ON SCHEDULE! \par
\'01 Keep your appointments; this is absolutely necessary for success. \par
\'01 Irregular dosing could restart the maturation process. \par
WHEN TO CALL YOUR DOCTOR \par
The following items are not necessarily problems, but your doctor will want to know \par
about them. Call your doctor if: \par
\'01 There is redness or puffiness of the skin around where the shot was given. \par
\'01 Pubertal changes continue. \par
\'01 Your daughter has a period, especially after the first month. \par
\'01 You have problems keeping the monthly injection schedule. \par
\'01 Anything else happens that causes you concern. \par
\par
THINGS TO MENTION AT YOUR \par
NEXT APPOINTMENT: \par
\'01 If your child has substantial mood swings (write down the date this happens) \par
\'01 Any behavioral changes (boys may become aggressive; girls may become moody) \par
PARENT SUPPORT GROUP \par
The MAGIC Foundation (Major Aspects of Growth in Children) provides free brochures, \par
growth charts, children\rquote s newsletters, and information on endocrine disorders affecting \par
children\rquote s growth and development. The MAGIC Foundation at 1-800-362-4423 can also \par
put you in touch with other parents who are raising children with precocious puberty. \par
This patient education brochure is not intended to be a substitute for information \par
provided to you by your physician or provided to your physician by TAP \par
Pharmaceuticals Inc. \par
You should discuss with your physician any questions you have about the diagnosis and \par
treatment of precocious puberty. \par
This information is provided as a service of TAP Pharmaceuticals Inc. \par
TAP Pharmaceuticals Inc. \par
Lake Forest, IL 60045 \par
(Nos. 2108, 2282, 2440) \par
03-5020-R5; Revised: December, 2000 \par
\'ae\endash Registered Trademark \par
\'d32000 TAP Pharmaceutical Products Inc. Printed in U.S.A. \par
\par
EXHIBIT VIII.\par
\par
LUPRON DEPOT-PED PACKAGE INSERT\par
\par
\f2\fs20 LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 1 of 9LUPRON DEPOT-PED\'ae(leuprolide acetate for depot suspension)7.5 mg, 11.25 mg and 15 mgRx onlyDESCRIPTIONLeuprolide acetate is a synthetic nonapeptide analog of naturally occurring gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH or LH-RH). The analog possesses greater potency than the naturalhormone. The chemical name is 5-oxo-L-prolyl-L-histidyl-L-tryptophyl-L-seryl-L-tyrosyl-D-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-arginyl-N-ethyl-L-prolinamide acetate (salt) with the following structuralformula:LUPRON DEPOT-PED is available in a prefilled dual-chamber syringe containing sterilelyophilized microspheres which, when mixed with diluent, become a suspension intended as asingle intramuscular injection.The front chamber of LUPRON DEPOT-PED 7.5 mg, 11.25 mg, and 15 mg prefilled dual-chamber syringe contains leuprolide acetate (7.5/11.25/15 mg), purified gelatin(1.3/1.95/2.6 mg), DL-lactic and glycolic acids copolymer (66.2/99.3/132.4 mg), and D-mannitol(13.2/19.8/26.4 mg). The second chamber of diluent contains carboxymethylcellulose sodium(5 mg), D-mannitol (50 mg), polysorbate 80 (1 mg), water for injection, USP, and glacial aceticacid, USP to control pH.During the manufacture of LUPRON DEPOT-PED, acetic acid is lost, leaving the peptide.CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYLeuprolide acetate, a GnRH agonist, acts as a potent inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion whengiven continuously and in therapeutic doses. Human studies indicate that following an initialstimulation of gonadotropins, chronic stimulation with leuprolide acetate results in suppressionor \ldblquote downregulation\rdblquote  of these hormones and consequent suppression of ovarian and testicularsteroidogenesis. These effects are reversible on discontinuation of drug therapy.Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.Pharmacokinetics \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 2 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 2 of 9Absorption Following a single LUPRON DEPOT 7.5 mg injection to adult patients, meanpeak leuprolide plasma concentration was almost 20 ng/mL at 4 hours and then declined to0.36 ng/mL at 4 weeks. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could notbe distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study. Nondetectable leuprolideplasma concentrations have been observed during chronic LUPRON DEPOT 7.5 mgadministration, but testosterone levels appear to be maintained at castrate levels.Distribution The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following intravenousbolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro binding to human plasmaproteins ranged from 43% to 49%.Metabolism In healthy male volunteers, a 1 mg bolus of leuprolide administered intravenouslyrevealed that the mean systemic clearance was 7.6 L/h, with a terminal elimination half-life ofapproximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model.In rats and dogs, administration of14C-labeled leuprolide was shown to be metabolized tosmaller inactive peptides, a pentapeptide (Metabolite I), tripeptides (Metabolites II and III) anda dipeptide (Metabolite IV). These fragments may be further catabolized.The major metabolite (M-I) plasma concentrations measured in 5 prostate cancer patientsreached maximum concentration 2 to 6 hours after dosing and were approximately 6% of thepeak parent drug concentration. One week after dosing, mean plasma M-I concentrations wereapproximately 20% of mean leuprolide concentrations.Excretion Following administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg to 3 patients, less than 5%of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.Special Populations The pharmacokinetics of the drug in hepatically and renally impairedpatients have not been determined.CLINICAL STUDIESIn children with central precocious puberty (CPP), stimulated and basal gonadotropins arereduced to prepubertal levels. Testosterone and estradiol are reduced to prepubertal levels inmales and females respectively. Reduction of gonadotropins will allow for normal physical andpsychological growth and development. Natural maturation occurs when gonadotropins returnto pubertal levels following discontinuation of leuprolide acetate.The following physiologic effects have been noted with the chronic administration ofleuprolide acetate in this patient population.1. Skeletal Growth. A measurable increase in body length can be noted since theepiphyseal plates will not close prematurely.2. Organ Growth. Reproductive organs will return to a prepubertal state.3. Menses. Menses, if present, will cease.In a study of 22 children with central precocious puberty, doses of LUPRON DEPOT weregiven every 4 weeks and plasma levels were determined according to weight categories assummarized below: \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 3 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 3 of 9Patient WeightRange (kg)Group WeightAverage (kg)Dose (mg)Trough Plasma Leuprolide LevelMean \'b1SD (ng/mL)*20.2 - 27.022.77.50.77\'b10.03328.4 - 36.832.511.251.25\'b11.0639.3 - 57.544.215.01.59\'b10.65*Group average values determined at Week 4 immediately prior to leuprolide injection. Drug levels at 12 and24 weeks were similar to respective 4 week levels.INDICATIONS AND USAGELUPRON DEPOT-PED is indicated in the treatment of children with central precociouspuberty. Children should be selected using the following criteria:1. Clinical diagnosis of CPP (idiopathic or neurogenic) with onset of secondary sexualcharacteristics earlier than 8 years in females and 9 years in males.2. Clinical diagnosis should be confirmed prior to initiation of therapy:\bullet  Confirmation of diagnosis by a pubertal response to a GnRH stimulation test. Thesensitivity and methodology of this assay must be understood.\bullet  Bone age advanced one year beyond the chronological age.3. Baseline evaluation should also include:\bullet  Height and weight measurements.\bullet  Sex steroid levels.\bullet  Adrenal steroid level to exclude congenital adrenal hyperplasia.\bullet  Beta human chorionic gonadotropin level to rule out a chorionic gonadotropin-secreting tumor.\bullet  Pelvic/adrenal/testicular ultrasound to rule out a steroid secreting tumor.\bullet  Computerized tomography of the head to rule out intracranial tumor.CONTRAINDICATIONSLUPRON DEPOT-PED is contraindicated in women who are or may become pregnant whilereceiving the drug. When administered on day 6 of pregnancy at test dosages of 0.00024,0.0024, and 0.024 mg/kg (1/1200 to 1/12 of the human pediatric dose) to rabbits,LUPRON DEPOT produced a dose-related increase in major fetal abnormalities. Similarstudies in rats failed to demonstrate an increase in fetal malformations. There was increasedfetal mortality and decreased fetal weights with the two higher doses of LUPRON DEPOT inrabbits and with the highest dose in rats. The effects on fetal mortality are logicalconsequences of the alterations in hormonal levels brought about by this drug. Therefore, thepossibility exists that spontaneous abortion may occur if the drug is administered duringpregnancy.Leuprolide acetate is contraindicated in children demonstrating hypersensitivity to GnRH,GnRH agonist analogs, or any of the excipients. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 4 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 4 of 9A report of an anaphylactic reaction to synthetic GnRH (Factrel) has been reported in themedical literature.1WARNINGSDuring the early phase of therapy, gonadotropins and sex steroids rise above baselinebecause of the natural stimulatory effect of the drug. Therefore, an increase in clinical signsand symptoms may be observed. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY section.)Noncompliance with drug regimen or inadequate dosing may result in inadequate control ofthe pubertal process. The consequences of poor control include the return of pubertal signssuch as menses, breast development, and testicular growth. The long-term consequences ofinadequate control of gonadal steroid secretion are unknown, but may include a furthercompromise of adult stature.PRECAUTIONSLaboratory Tests Response to LUPRON DEPOT-PED should be monitored 1-2 months afterthe start of therapy with a GnRH stimulation test and sex steroid levels. Measurement of boneage for advancement should be done every 6-12 months.Sex steroids may increase or rise above prepubertal levels if the dose is inadequate. (SeeWARNINGS section.) Once a therapeutic dose has been established, gonadotropin and sexsteroid levels will decline to prepubertal levels.Drug Interactions No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interaction studies have beenconducted. However, because leuprolide acetate is a peptide that is primarily degraded bypeptidase and not by cytochrome P-450 enzymes as noted in specific studies, and the drug isonly about 46% bound to plasma proteins, drug interactions would not be expected to occur.Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions Administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg in womenresults in suppression of the pituitary-gonadal system. Normal function is usually restoredwithin three months after treatment is discontinued. Therefore, diagnostic tests of pituitarygonadotropic and gonadal functions conducted during treatment and for up to three monthsafter discontinuation of LUPRON DEPOT may be misleading.Information for Parents Prior to starting therapy with LUPRON DEPOT-PED, the parent orguardian must be aware of the importance of continuous therapy. Adherence to 4 week drugadministration schedules must be accepted if therapy is to be successful.\bullet  During the first 2 months of therapy, a female may experience menses or spotting. Ifbleeding continues beyond the second month, notify the physician.\bullet  Any irritation at the injection site should be reported to the physician immediately.\bullet  Report any unusual signs or symptoms to the physician.Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility A two-year carcinogenicity studywas conducted in rats and mice. In rats, a dose-related increase of benign pituitary hyperplasiaand benign pituitary adenomas was noted at 24 months when the drug was administeredsubcutaneously at high daily doses (0.6 to 4 mg/kg). There was a significant but not dose- \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 5 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 5 of 9related increase of pancreatic islet-cell adenomas in females and of testicular interstitial celladenomas in males (highest incidence in the low dose group). In mice, no leuprolide acetate-induced tumors or pituitary abnormalities were observed at a dose as high as 60 mg/kg for twoyears. Adult patients have been treated with leuprolide acetate for up to three years with dosesas high as 10 mg/day and for two years with doses as high as 20 mg/day withoutdemonstrable pituitary abnormalities.Although no clinical studies have been completed in children to assess the full reversibilityof fertility suppression, animal studies (prepubertal and adult rats and monkeys) with leuprolideacetate and other GnRH analogs have shown functional recovery. However, following a studywith leuprolide acetate, immature male rats demonstrated tubular degeneration in the testeseven after a recovery period. In spite of the failure to recover histologically, the treated malesproved to be as fertile as the controls. Also, no histologic changes were observed in the femalerats following the same protocol. In both sexes, the offspring of the treated animals appearednormal. The effect of the treatment of the parents on the reproductive performance of the F1generation was not tested. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.Pregnancy, Teratogenic Effects Pregnancy Category X. (See CONTRAINDICATIONSsection.)Nursing Mothers It is not known whether leuprolide acetate is excreted in human milk.LUPRON should not be used by nursing mothers.Geriatric Use See also the labeling for LUPRON DEPOT 7.5 mg which is indicated for thepalliative treatment of advanced prostate cancer. For LUPRON DEPOT-PED 11.25 mg andLUPRON DEPOT-PED 15 mg, no clinical information has been established for persons aged65 and over.ADVERSE REACTIONSClinical TrialsPotential exacerbation of signs and symptoms during the first few weeks of treatment (SeePRECAUTIONS section.) is a concern in patients with rapidly advancing central precociouspuberty.In two studies of children with central precocious puberty, in 2% or more of the patientsreceiving the drug, the following adverse reactions were reported to have a possible orprobable relationship to drug as ascribed by the treating physician. Reactions which are notconsidered drug-related are excluded. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 6 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 6 of 9Number of PatientsN = 395(%)Body as a WholeGeneral Pain7(2)Integumentary SystemAcne/Seborrhea7(2)Injection Site Reactions Including Abscess21(5)Rash Including Erythema Multiforme8(2)Urogenital SystemVaginitis/Bleeding/Discharge7(2)In those same studies, the following adverse reactions were reported in less than 2% of thepatients.Body as a Whole - Body Odor, Fever, Headache, Infection; Cardiovascular System - Syncope,Vasodilation; Digestive System - Dysphagia, Gingivitis, Nausea/Vomiting; Endocrine System -Accelerated Sexual Maturity; Metabolic and Nutritional Disorders - Peripheral Edema, WeightGain; Nervous System - Emotional Lability, Nervousness, Personality Disorder, Somnolence;Respiratory System - Epistaxis; Integumentary System - Alopecia, Skin Striae; UrogenitalSystem - Cervix Disorder, Gynecomastia/Breast Disorders, Urinary Incontinence.PostmarketingDuring postmarketing surveillance, which includes other dosage forms, the following adverseevents were reported.Symptoms consistent with an anaphylactoid or asthmatic process have been rarelyreported. Rash, urticaria, and photosensitivity reactions have also been reported.Localized reactions including induration and abscess have been reported at the site ofinjection.Cardiovascular System - Hypotension; Hemic and Lymphatic System - Decreased WBC;Central/Peripheral Nervous System - Peripheral neuropathy, Spinal fracture/paralysis;Musculoskeletal System - Tenosynovitis-like symptoms; Urogenital System - Prostate pain.See other LUPRON DEPOT and LUPRON Injection package inserts for other eventsreported in different patient populations.OVERDOSAGEIn rats, subcutaneous administration of 125 to 250 times the recommended human pediatricdose, expressed on a per body weight basis, resulted in dyspnea, decreased activity, and localirritation at the injection site. There is no evidence at present that there is a clinical counterpartof this phenomenon. In early clinical trials using leuprolide acetate in adult patients, doses ashigh as 20 mg/day for up to two years caused no adverse effects differing from those observedwith the 1 mg/day dose.DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATIONLUPRON DEPOT-PED must be administered under the supervision of a physician. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 7 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 7 of 9The dose of LUPRON DEPOT-PED must be individualized for each child. The dose isbased on a mg/kg ratio of drug to body weight. Younger children require higher doses ona mg/kg ratio.For each dosage form, after 1-2 months of initiating therapy or changing doses, the childmust be monitored with a GnRH stimulation test, sex steroids, and Tanner staging to confirmdownregulation. Measurements of bone age for advancement should be monitored every 6-12months. The dose should be titrated upward until no progression of the condition is notedeither clinically and/or by laboratory parameters.The first dose found to result in adequate downregulation can probably be maintained forthe duration of therapy in most children. However, there are insufficient data to guide dosageadjustment as patients move into higher weight categories after beginning therapy at veryyoung ages and low dosages. It is recommended that adequate downregulation be verified insuch patients whose weight has increased significantly while on therapy.Discontinuation of LUPRON DEPOT-PED should be considered before age 11 for femalesand age 12 for males.The recommended starting dose is 0.3 mg/kg/4 weeks (minimum 7.5 mg) administered asa single intramuscular injection. The starting dose will be dictated by the child\rquote s weight.&#8804; 25 kg7.5 mg> 25-37.5 kg11.25 mg> 37.5 kg15 mgIf total downregulation is not achieved, the dose should be titrated upward in increments of3.75 mg every 4 weeks. This dose will be considered the maintenance dose.The lyophilized microspheres are to be reconstituted and administered as a singleintramuscular injection. For optimal performance of the prefilled dual chamber syringe (PDS),read and follow the following instructions:1. The LUPRON DEPOT powder should be visually inspected and the syringe should NOTBE USED if clumping or caking is evident. A thin layer of powder on the wall of thesyringe is considered normal. The diluent should appear clear.2. To prepare for injection, screw the white plunger into the end stopper until the stopperbegins to turn.3. Hold the syringe UPRIGHT. Release the diluent by SLOWLY PUSHING (6 to 8 seconds)the plunger until the first stopper is at the blue line in the middle of the barrel.4. Keep the syringe UPRIGHT. Gently mix the microspheres (powder) thoroughly to form auniform suspension. The suspension will appear milky. If the powder adheres to thestopper or caking/clumping is present, tap the syringe with your finger to disperse. DONOT USE if any of the powder has not gone into suspension. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 8 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 8 of 95. Hold the syringe UPRIGHT. With the opposite hand pull the needle cap upward withouttwisting.6. Keep the syringe UPRIGHT. Advance the plunger to expel the air from the syringe.7. Inject the entire contents of the syringe intramuscularly at the time of reconstitution. Thesuspension settles very quickly following reconstitution; therefore, LUPRON DEPOTshould be mixed and used immediately.NOTE: Aspirated blood would be visible just below the luer lock connection if a blood vesselis accidentally penetrated. If present, blood can be seen through the transparent LuproLoc\'99safety device.AFTER INJECTION8. Withdraw the needle. Immediately activate the LuproLoc\'99 safety device by pushing thearrow forward with the thumb or finger until the device is fully extended and a CLICK isheard or felt.Since the product does not contain a preservative, the suspension should be discarded ifnot used immediately.As with other drugs administered by injection, the injection site should be variedperiodically.HOW SUPPLIEDLUPRON DEPOT-PED is packaged as follows:Kit with prefilled dual-chamber syringe7.5 mgNDC 0300-2108-01Kit with prefilled dual-chamber syringe11.25 mgNDC 0300-2282-01Kit with prefilled dual-chamber syringe15 mgNDC 0300-2440-01Each syringe contains sterile lyophilized microspheres which is leuprolide incorporated in abiodegradable copolymer of lactic and glycolic acids. When mixed with diluent,LUPRON DEPOT-PED is administered as a single IM injection.An information pamphlet for parents is included with the kit.Store at 25\'b0C (77\'b0F); excursions permitted to 15-30\'b0C (59-86\'b0F) [See USP ControlledRoom Temperature]REFERENCE1. MacLeod TL, et al. Anaphylactic reaction to synthetic luteinizing hormone-releasinghormone. Fertil Steril 1987 Sept; 48(3):500-502.U.S. Patent Nos. 4,652,441; 4,677,191; 4,728,721; 4,849,228; 4,917,893; 5,330,767;5,476,663; 5,823,997; 5,980,488; and 6,036,976. Other patents pending. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 9 \line LUPRON DEPOT-PED Package InsertPage 9 of 9Manufactured forTAP Pharmaceuticals Inc.Lake Forest, IL 60045, U.S.A.by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company LimitedOsaka, JAPAN 540-8645TM-Trademark\'ae \emdash  Registered Trademark(Nos. 2108, 2282, 2440)03-5411-R13; Revised: January, 2005\'a9 1993 \endash  2005, TAP Pharmaceutical Products Inc. \par
\par
EXHIBIT IX.\par
\par
LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 PACKAGE INSERT\par
 \par
LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 1 of 18This is combined labeling. Examples of different fonts and colors appear below.\bullet  General information\bullet  Information on endometriosis\bullet  Information on uterine fibroidsLUPRON DEPOT\'ae3.75 mg(leuprolide acetate for depot suspension)DESCRIPTIONLeuprolide acetate is a synthetic nonapeptide analog of naturally occurringgonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH or LH-RH). The analog possesses greaterpotency than the natural hormone. The chemical name is 5-oxo-L-prolyl-L-histidyl-L-tryptophyl-L-seryl-L-tyrosyl-D-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-arginyl-N-ethyl-L-prolinamide acetate(salt) with the following structural formula:LUPRON DEPOT is available in a prefilled dual-chamber syringe containing sterilelyophilized microspheres which, when mixed with diluent, become a suspensionintended as a monthly intramuscular injection.The front chamber of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg prefilled dual-chamber syringecontains leuprolide acetate (3.75 mg), purified gelatin (0.65 mg), DL-lactic and glycolicacids copolymer (33.1 mg), and D-mannitol (6.6 mg). The second chamber of diluentcontains carboxymethylcellulose sodium (5 mg), D-mannitol (50 mg),polysorbate 80 (1 mg), water for injection, USP, and glacial acetic acid, USP to controlpH.During the manufacture of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg, acetic acid is lost, leaving thepeptide.CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYLeuprolide acetate is a long-acting GnRH analog. A single monthly injection ofLUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg results in an initial stimulation followed by a prolongedsuppression of pituitary gonadotropins. Repeated dosing at monthly intervals results indecreased secretion of gonadal steroids; consequently, tissues and functions thatdepend on gonadal steroids for their maintenance become quiescent. This effect isreversible on discontinuation of drug therapy.Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally. Intramuscular injection of thedepot formulation provides plasma concentrations of leuprolide over a period of onemonth. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 2 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 2 of 18PharmacokineticsAbsorption A single dose of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was administered byintramuscular injection to healthy female volunteers. The absorption of leuprolide wascharacterized by an initial increase in plasma concentration, with peak concentrationranging from 4.6 to 10.2 ng/mL at four hours postdosing. However, intact leuprolide andan inactive metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay used in the study.Following the initial rise, leuprolide concentrations started to plateau within two daysafter dosing and remained relatively stable for about four to five weeks with plasmaconcentrations of about 0.30 ng/mL.Distribution The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide followingintravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro bindingto human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%.Metabolism In healthy male volunteers, a 1 mg bolus of leuprolide administeredintravenously revealed that the mean systemic clearance was 7.6 L/h, with a terminalelimination half-life of approximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model.In rats and dogs, administration of14C-labeled leuprolide was shown to bemetabolized to smaller inactive peptides, a pentapeptide (Metabolite I), tripeptides(Metabolites II and III) and a dipeptide (Metabolite IV). These fragments may be furthercatabolized.The major metabolite (M-I) plasma concentrations measured in 5 prostate cancerpatients reached maximum concentration 2 to 6 hours after dosing and wereapproximately 6% of the peak parent drug concentration. One week after dosing, meanplasma M-I concentrations were approximately 20% of mean leuprolide concentrations.Excretion Following administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg to 3 patients, lessthan 5% of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.Special Populations The pharmacokinetics of the drug in hepatically and renallyimpaired patients have not been determined.Drug Interactions No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interaction studies have beenconducted with LUPRON DEPOT. However, because leuprolide acetate is a peptidethat is primarily degraded by peptidase and not by cytochrome P-450 enzymes as notedin specific studies, and the drug is only about 46% bound to plasma proteins, druginteractions would not be expected to occur.CLINICAL STUDIESEndometriosis: In controlled clinical studies, LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg monthly for sixmonths was shown to be comparable to danazol 800 mg/day in relieving the clinicalsign/symptoms of endometriosis (pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, pelvic tenderness, andinduration) and in reducing the size of endometrial implants as evidenced by laparoscopy. Theclinical significance of a decrease in endometriotic lesions is not known at this time, and inaddition laparoscopic staging of endometriosis does not necessarily correlate with the severity ofsymptoms.LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg monthly induced amenorrhea in 74% and 98% of the patientsafter the first and second treatment months respectively. Most of the remaining patients reportedepisodes of only light bleeding or spotting. In the first, second and third post-treatment months, \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 3 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 3 of 18normal menstrual cycles resumed in 7%, 71% and 95% of patients, respectively, excluding thosewho became pregnant.Figure 1 illustrates the percent of patients with symptoms at baseline, final treatment visitand sustained relief at 6 and 12 months following discontinuation of treatment for the varioussymptoms evaluated during two controlled clinical studies. This included all patients at end oftreatment and those who elected to participate in the follow-up period. This might provide aslight bias in the results at follow-up as 75% of the original patients entered the follow-up study,and 36% were evaluated at 6 months and 26% at 12 months.Hormonal replacement therapy: Two clinical studies with a treatment duration of 12 monthsindicate that concurrent hormonal therapy (norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily) is effective insignificantly reducing the loss of bone mineral density associated with LUPRON, withoutcompromising the efficacy of LUPRON in relieving symptoms of endometriosis. (All patients inthese studies received calcium supplementation with 1000 mg elemental calcium). Onecontrolled, randomized and double-blind study included 51 women treated withLUPRON DEPOT alone and 55 women treated with LUPRON plus norethindrone acetate 5 mgdaily. The second study was an open label study in which 136 women were treated withLUPRON plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily. This study confirmed the reduction in loss ofbone mineral density that was observed in the controlled study. Suppression of menses wasmaintained throughout treatment in 84% and 73% of patients receiving LD/N in the controlled \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 4 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 4 of 18study and open label study, respectively. The median time for menses resumption after treatmentwith LD/N was 8 weeks.Figure 2 illustrates the mean pain scores for the LD/N group from the controlled study.BaselineTreatment AverageFigure 2Treatment Period Mean Pain Scores For LD/N* PatientsDysmenorrheaPelvic PainDeep DyspareuniaPelvic TendernessPelvic Induration4 = Severe3 = Moderate2 = Mild1 = None* LD/N = LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg dailyUterine Leiomyomata (Fibroids): In controlled clinical trials, administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg fora period of three or six months was shown to decrease uterine and fibroid volume, thus allowing for relief ofclinical symptoms (abdominal bloating, pelvic pain, and pressure). Excessive vaginal bleeding(menorrhagia and menometrorrhagia) decreased, resulting in improvement in hematologic parameters.In three clinical trials, enrollment was not based on hematologic status. Mean uterine volumedecreased by 41% and myoma volume decreased by 37% at final visit as evidenced by ultrasound or MRI.These patients also experienced a decrease in symptoms including excessive vaginal bleeding and pelvicdiscomfort. Benefit occurred by three months of therapy, but additional gain was observed with anadditional three months of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg. Ninety-five percent of these patients becameamenorrheic with 61%, 25%, and 4% experiencing amenorrhea during the first, second, and third treatmentmonths respectively.Post-treatment follow-up was carried out for a small percentage of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg patientsamong the 77% who demonstrated a &#8805; 25% decrease in uterine volume while on therapy. Menses usuallyreturned within two months of cessation of therapy. Mean time to return to pretreatment uterine size was8.3 months. Regrowth did not appear to be related to pretreatment uterine volume.In another controlled clinical study, enrollment was based on hematocrit &#8804; 30% and/or hemoglobin&#8804; 10.2 g/dL. Administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg, concomitantly with iron, produced an increase of&#8805; 6% hematocrit and &#8805; 2 g/dL hemoglobin in 77% of patients at three months of therapy. The meanchange in hematocrit was 10.1% and the mean change in hemoglobin was 4.2 g/dL. Clinical response was \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 5 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 5 of 18judged to be a hematocrit of &#8805; 36% and hemoglobin of &#8805; 12 g/dL, thus allowing for autologous blooddonation prior to surgery. At three months, 75% of patients met this criterion.At three months, 80% of patients experienced relief from either menorrhagia or menometrorrhagia. Aswith the previous studies, episodes of spotting and menstrual-like bleeding were noted in some patients.In this same study, a decrease of &#8805; 25% was seen in uterine and myoma volumes in 60% and 54% ofpatients respectively. LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was found to relieve symptoms of bloating, pelvic pain,and pressure.There is no evidence that pregnancy rates are enhanced or adversely affected bythe use of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg.INDICATIONS AND USAGEEndometriosis:LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg is indicated for management of endometriosis, including pain reliefand reduction of endometriotic lesions. LUPRON DEPOT monthly with norethindrone acetate5 mg daily is also indicated for initial management of endometriosis and for management ofrecurrence of symptoms. (Refer also to norethindrone acetate prescribing information forWARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS, CONTRAINDICATIONS and ADVERSE REACTIONSassociated with norethindrone acetate). Duration of initial treatment or retreatment should belimited to 6 months.Uterine Leiomyomata (Fibroids):LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg concomitantly with iron therapy is indicated for the preoperative hematologicimprovement of patients with anemia caused by uterine leiomyomata. The clinician may wish to consider aone-month trial period on iron alone inasmuch as some of the patients will respond to iron alone. (SeeTable 1.) LUPRON may be added if the response to iron alone is considered inadequate. Recommendedduration of therapy with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg is up to three months.Experience with LUPRON DEPOT in females has been limited to women 18 years of age and older.Table 1PERCENT OF PATIENTS ACHIEVINGHEMOGLOBIN &#8805; 12 GM/DLTreatment GroupWeek 4Week 8Week 12LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg with Iron41*71**79*Iron Alone174056* P-Value < 0.01** P-Value < 0.001CONTRAINDICATIONS1. Hypersensitivity to GnRH, GnRH agonist analogs or any of the excipients inLUPRON DEPOT.2. Undiagnosed abnormal vaginal bleeding.3. LUPRON DEPOT is contraindicated in women who are or may become pregnantwhile receiving the drug. LUPRON DEPOT may cause fetal harm whenadministered to a pregnant woman. Major fetal abnormalities were observed inrabbits but not in rats after administration of LUPRON DEPOT throughout gestation.There was increased fetal mortality and decreased fetal weights in rats and rabbits. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 6 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 6 of 18(See Pregnancy section.) The effects on fetal mortality are expected consequencesof the alterations in hormonal levels brought about by the drug. If this drug is usedduring pregnancy, or if the patient becomes pregnant while taking this drug, thepatient should be apprised of the potential hazard to the fetus.4. Use in women who are breast-feeding. (See Nursing Mothers section.)5. Norethindrone acetate is contraindicated in women with the following conditions:&#8722; Thrombophlebitis, thromboembolic disorders, cerebral apoplexy, or a past historyof these conditions&#8722; Markedly impaired liver function or liver disease&#8722; Known or suspected carcinoma of the breastWARNINGSSafe use of leuprolide acetate or norethindrone acetate in pregnancy has not beenestablished clinically. Before starting treatment with LUPRON DEPOT, pregnancy mustbe excluded.When used monthly at the recommended dose, LUPRON DEPOT usually inhibitsovulation and stops menstruation. Contraception is not insured, however, by takingLUPRON DEPOT. Therefore, patients should use non-hormonal methods ofcontraception. Patients should be advised to see their physician if they believe theymay be pregnant. If a patient becomes pregnant during treatment, the drug must bediscontinued and the patient must be apprised of the potential risk to the fetus.During the early phase of therapy, sex steroids temporarily rise above baselinebecause of the physiologic effect of the drug. Therefore, an increase in clinical signsand symptoms may be observed during the initial days of therapy, but these willdissipate with continued therapy.Symptoms consistent with an anaphylactoid or asthmatic process have been rarelyreported post-marketing.The following applies to co-treatment with LUPRON and norethindrone acetate:Norethindrone acetate treatment should be discontinued if there is a sudden partialor complete loss of vision or if there is sudden onset of proptosis, diplopia, or migraine.If examination reveals papilledema or retinal vascular lesions, medication should bewithdrawn.Because of the occasional occurrence of thrombophlebitis and pulmonary embolismin patients taking progestogens, the physician should be alert to the earliestmanifestations of the disease in women taking norethindrone acetate.Assessment and management of risk factors for cardiovascular disease isrecommended prior to initiation of add-back therapy with norethindrone acetate.Norethindrone acetate should be used with caution in women with risk factors, includinglipid abnormalities or cigarette smoking.PRECAUTIONSInformation for Patients An information pamphlet for patients is included with theproduct. Patients should be aware of the following information:1. Since menstruation usually stops with effective doses of LUPRON DEPOT, thepatient should notify her physician if regular menstruation persists. Patients \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 7 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 7 of 18missing successive doses of LUPRON DEPOT may experience breakthroughbleeding.2. Patients should not use LUPRON DEPOT if they are pregnant, breast feeding,have undiagnosed abnormal vaginal bleeding, or are allergic to any of theingredients in LUPRON DEPOT.3. Safe use of the drug in pregnancy has not been established clinically. Therefore, anon-hormonal method of contraception should be used during treatment. Patientsshould be advised that if they miss successive doses of LUPRON DEPOT,breakthrough bleeding or ovulation may occur with the potential for conception. If apatient becomes pregnant during treatment, she should discontinue treatment andconsult her physician.4. Adverse events occurring in clinical studies with LUPRON DEPOT that areassociated with hypoestrogenism include: hot flashes, headaches, emotionallability, decreased libido, acne, myalgia, reduction in breast size, and vaginaldryness. Estrogen levels returned to normal after treatment was discontinued.5. Patients should be counseled on the possibility of the development or worsening ofdepression and the occurrence of memory disorders.6. The induced hypoestrogenic state also results in a loss in bone density over thecourse of treatment, some of which may not be reversible. For a period up to sixmonths, this bone loss should not be clinically significant. Clinical studies showthat concurrent hormonal therapy with norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily is effectivein reducing loss of bone mineral density that occurs with LUPRON. (All patientsreceived calcium supplementation with 1000 mg elemental calcium.) (SeeChanges in Bone Density section).7. If the symptoms of endometriosis recur after a course of therapy, retreatment with asix-month course of LUPRON DEPOT and norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily maybe considered. Retreatment beyond this one six month course cannot berecommended. It is recommended that bone density be assessed beforeretreatment begins to ensure that values are within normal limits. Retreatment withLUPRON DEPOT alone is not recommended.8. In patients with major risk factors for decreased bone mineral content such aschronic alcohol and/or tobacco use, strong family history of osteoporosis, or chronicuse of drugs that can reduce bone mass such as anticonvulsants or corticosteroids,LUPRON DEPOT therapy may pose an additional risk. In these patients, the risksand benefits must be weighed carefully before therapy with LUPRON DEPOT aloneis instituted, and concomitant treatment with norethindrone acetate 5 mg dailyshould be considered. Retreatment with gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs,including LUPRON is not advisable in patients with major risk factors for loss ofbone mineral content.9. Because norethindrone acetate may cause some degree of fluid retention,conditions which might be influenced by this factor, such as epilepsy, migraine,asthma, cardiac or renal dysfunctions require careful observation duringnorethindrone acetate add-back therapy.10. Patients who have a history of depression should be carefully observed duringtreatment with norethindrone acetate and norethindrone acetate should bediscontinued if severe depression occurs. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 8 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 8 of 18Laboratory Tests See ADVERSE REACTIONS section.Drug Interactions See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics.Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions Administration of LUPRON DEPOT in therapeuticdoses results in suppression of the pituitary-gonadal system. Normal function is usuallyrestored within three months after treatment is discontinued. Therefore, diagnostic testsof pituitary gonadotropic and gonadal functions conducted during treatment and for upto three months after discontinuation of LUPRON DEPOT may be misleading.Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility A two-year carcinogenicitystudy was conducted in rats and mice. In rats, a dose-related increase of benignpituitary hyperplasia and benign pituitary adenomas was noted at 24 months when thedrug was administered subcutaneously at high daily doses (0.6 to 4 mg/kg). There wasa significant but not dose-related increase of pancreatic islet-cell adenomas in femalesand of testicular interstitial cell adenomas in males (highest incidence in the low dosegroup). In mice, no leuprolide acetate-induced tumors or pituitary abnormalities wereobserved at a dose as high as 60 mg/kg for two years. Patients have been treated withleuprolide acetate for up to three years with doses as high as 10 mg/day and for twoyears with doses as high as 20 mg/day without demonstrable pituitary abnormalities.Mutagenicity studies have been performed with leuprolide acetate using bacterialand mammalian systems. These studies provided no evidence of a mutagenicpotential.Clinical and pharmacologic studies in adults (>18 years) with leuprolide acetate andsimilar analogs have shown reversibility of fertility suppression when the drug isdiscontinued after continuous administration for periods of up to 24 weeks. Although noclinical studies have been completed in children to assess the full reversibility of fertilitysuppression, animal studies (prepubertal and adult rats and monkeys) with leuprolideacetate and other GnRH analogs have shown functional recovery.Pregnancy, Teratogenic Effects Pregnancy Category X. (SeeCONTRAINDICATIONS section.) When administered on day 6 of pregnancy at testdosages of 0.00024, 0.0024, and 0.024 mg/kg (1/300 to 1/3 of the human dose) torabbits, LUPRON DEPOT produced a dose-related increase in major fetalabnormalities. Similar studies in rats failed to demonstrate an increase in fetalmalformations. There was increased fetal mortality and decreased fetal weights withthe two higher doses of LUPRON DEPOT in rabbits and with the highest dose(0.024 mg/kg) in rats.Nursing Mothers It is not known whether LUPRON DEPOT is excreted in human milk.Because many drugs are excreted in human milk, and because the effects ofLUPRON DEPOT on lactation and/or the breast-fed child have not been determined,LUPRON DEPOT should not be used by nursing mothers.Pediatric Use Experience with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg for treatment ofendometriosis has been limited to women 18 years of age and older. See \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 9 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 9 of 18LUPRON DEPOT-PED\'ae(leuprolide acetate for depot suspension) labeling for the safetyand effectiveness in children with central precocious puberty.Geriatric Use This product has not been studied in women over 65 years of age and isnot indicated in this population.ADVERSE REACTIONSClinical TrialsEstradiol levels may increase during the first weeks following the initial injection ofLUPRON, but then decline to menopausal levels. This transient increase in estradiolcan be associated with a temporary worsening of signs and symptoms. (SeeWARNINGS section.)As would be expected with a drug that lowers serum estradiol levels, the mostfrequently reported adverse reactions were those related to hypoestrogenism.The monthly formulation of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was utilized incontrolled clinical trials that studied the drug in 166 endometriosis and 166 uterinefibroids patients. Adverse events reported in &#8805;5% of patients in either of thesepopulations and thought to be potentially related to drug are noted in the following table. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 10 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 10 of 18Table 2ADVERSE EVENTS REPORTED TO BE CAUSALLY RELATED TODRUG IN &#8805; 5% OF PATIENTSEndometriosis (2 Studies)Uterine Fibroids (4 Studies)LUPRONDEPOT3.75 mgDanazolPlaceboLUPRONDEPOT3.75 mgPlaceboN=166N=136N=31N=166N=163N(%)N(%)N(%)N(%)N(%)Body as a WholeAsthenia5(3)9(7)0(0)14(8.4)8(4.9)General pain31(19)22(16)1(3)14(8.4)10(6.1)Headache*53(32)30(22)2(6)43 (25.9)29(17.8)Cardiovascular SystemHot flashes/sweats*139(84)77(57)9(29)121 (72.9)29(17.8)Gastrointestinal SystemNausea/vomiting21(13)17(13)1(3)8(4.8)6(3.7)GI disturbances*11(7)8(6)1(3)5(3.0)2(1.2)Metabolic and Nutritional DisordersEdema12(7)17(13)1(3)9(5.4)2(1.2)Weight gain/loss22(13)36(26)0(0)5(3.0)2(1.2)Endocrine SystemAcne17(10)27(20)0(0)0(0)0(0)Hirsutism2(1)9(7)1(3)1(0.6)0(0)Musculoskeletal SystemJoint disorder*14(8)11(8)0(0)13(7.8)5(3.1)Myalgia*1(1)7(5)0(0)1(0.6)0(0)Nervous SystemDecreased libido*19(11)6(4)0(0)3(1.8)0(0)Depression/emotional lability*36(22)27(20)1(3)18 (10.8)7(4.3)Dizziness19(11)4(3)0(0)3(1.8)6(3.7)Nervousness*8(5)11(8)0(0)8(4.8)1(0.6)Neuromuscular disorders*11(7)17(13)0(0)3(1.8)0(0)Paresthesias12(7)11(8)0(0)2(1.2)1(0.6)Skin and AppendagesSkin reactions17(10)20(15)1(3)5(3.0)2(1.2)Urogenital SystemBreast changes/tenderness/pain*10(6)12(9)0(0)3(1.8)7(4.3)Vaginitis*46(28)23(17)0(0)19 (11.4)3(1.8)In these same studies, symptoms reported in <5% of patients included: Body as a Whole - Bodyodor, Flu syndrome, Injection site reactions; Cardiovascular System - Palpitations, Syncope,Tachycardia; Digestive System - Appetite changes, Dry mouth, Thirst; Endocrine System -Androgen-like effects; Hemic and Lymphatic System - Ecchymosis, Lymphadenopathy; NervousSystem \endash  Anxiety*, Insomnia/Sleep disorders*, Delusions, Memory disorder, Personalitydisorder; Respiratory System - Rhinitis; Skin and Appendages - Alopecia, Hair disorder, Naildisorder; Special Senses - Conjunctivitis, Ophthalmologic disorders*, Taste perversion;Urogenital System - Dysuria*, Lactation, Menstrual disorders.* = Possible effect of decreased estrogen. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 11 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 11 of 18In one controlled clinical trial utilizing the monthly formulation of LUPRON DEPOT, patients diagnosed withuterine fibroids received a higher dose (7.5 mg) of LUPRON DEPOT. Events seen with this dose that were thoughtto be potentially related to drug and were not seen at the lower dose included glossitis, hypesthesia, lactation,pyelonephritis, and urinary disorders. Generally, a higher incidence of hypoestrogenic effects was observed at thehigher dose.Table 3 lists the potentially drug-related adverse events observed in at least 5% of patients in anytreatment group during the first 6 months of treatment in the add-back clinical studies.In the controlled clinical trial, 50 of 51 (98%) patients in the LD group and 48 of 55 (87%)patients in the LD/N group reported experiencing hot flashes on one or more occasions duringtreatment. During Month 6 of treatment, 32 of 37 (86%) patients in the LD group and 22 of 38(58%) patients in the LD/N group reported having experienced hot flashes. The mean number ofdays on which hot flashes were reported during this month of treatment was 19 and 7 in the LDand LD/N treatment groups, respectively. The mean maximum number of hot flashes in a dayduring this month of treatment was 5.8 and 1.9 in the LD and LD/N treatment groups,respectively. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 12 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 12 of 18Table 3TREATMENT-RELATED ADVERSE EVENTS OCCURRING IN >5% OF PATIENTSControlled StudyOpen Label StudyLD - Only1N=51LD/N2N=55LD/N2N=136Adverse EventsN(%)N (%)N (%)Any Adverse Event50(98)53 (96)126 (93)Body as a WholeAsthenia9(18)10 (18)15 (11)Headache/Migraine33(65)28 (51)63 (46)Injection Site Reaction1(2)5(9)4(3)Pain12(24)16 (29)29 (21)Cardiovascular SystemHot flashes/sweats50(98)48 (87)78 (57)Digestive SystemAltered Bowel Function7(14)8 (15)14 (10)Changes in Appetite2(4)0(0)8(6)GI Disturbance2(4)4(7)6(4)Nausea/Vomiting13(25)16 (29)17 (13)Metabolic and Nutritional DisordersEdema0(0)5(9)9(7)Weight Changes6(12)7 (13)6(4)Nervous SystemAnxiety3(6)0(0)11(8)Depression/Emotional Lability16(31)15 (27)46 (34)Dizziness/Vertigo8(16)6 (11)10(7)Insomnia/Sleep Disorder16(31)7 (13)20 (15)Libido Changes5(10)2(4)10(7)Memory Disorder3(6)1(2)6(4)Nervousness4(8)2(4)15 (11)Neuromuscular Disorder1(2)5(9)4(3)Skin and AppendagesAlopecia0(0)5(9)4(3)Androgen-Like Effects2(4)3(5)24 (18)Skin/Mucous Membrane Reaction2(4)5(9)15 (11)Urogenital SystemBreast Changes/Pain/Tenderness3(6)7 (13)11(8)Menstrual Disorders1(2)0(0)7(5)Vaginitis10(20)8 (15)11(8)1LD-Only = LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg2LD/N = LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 13 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 13 of 18Changes in Bone DensityIn controlled clinical studies, patients with endometriosis (six months of therapy) oruterine fibroids (three months of therapy) were treated with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg.In endometriosis patients, vertebral bone density as measured by dual energy x-rayabsorptiometry (DEXA) decreased by an average of 3.2% at six months compared withthe pretreatment value. Clinical studies demonstrate that concurrent hormonal therapy(norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily) and calcium supplementation is effective insignificantly reducing the loss of bone mineral density that occurs with LUPRONtreatment, without compromising the efficacy of LUPRON in relieving symptoms ofendometriosis.LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily was evaluated intwo clinical trials. The results from this regimen were similar in both studies.LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was used as a control group in one study. The bone mineraldensity data of the lumbar spine from these two studies are presented in Table 4.Table 4MEAN PERCENT CHANGE FROM BASELINE IN BONEMINERAL DENSITY OF LUMBAR SPINE1Includes on-treatment measurements that fell within 2-252 days after the first day of treatment.2Includes on-treatment measurements >252 days after the first day of treatment.When LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was administered for three months in uterine fibroidpatients, vertebral trabecular bone mineral density as assessed by quantitative digitalradiography (QDR) revealed a mean decrease of 2.7% compared with baseline. Sixmonths after discontinuation of therapy, a trend toward recovery was observed. Use ofLUPRON DEPOT for longer than three months (uterine fibroids) or six months(endometriosis) or in the presence of other known risk factors for decreased bonemineral content may cause additional bone loss and is not recommended.LUPRON DEPOT3.75mgLUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg plusnorethindrone acetate 5 mg dailyControlled StudyControlled StudyOpen Label StudyNChangeNChangeNChangeWeek 24141-3.2%42-0.3%115-0.2%Week 52229-6.3%32-1.0%84-1.1% \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 14 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 14 of 18Changes in Laboratory Values During TreatmentPlasma EnzymesEndometriosis: During early clinical trials with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg, regular laboratorymonitoring revealed that AST levels were more than twice the upper limit of normal in only onepatient. There was no clinical or other laboratory evidence of abnormal liver function.In two other clinical trials, 6 of 191 patients receiving LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg plusnorethindrone acetate 5 mg daily for up to 12 months developed an elevated (at least twice theupper limit of normal) SGPT or GGT. Five of the 6 increases were observed beyond 6 months oftreatment. None were associated with elevated bilirubin concentration.Uterine Leiomyomata (Fibroids): In clinical trials with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg, five (3%) patients had apost-treatment transaminase value that was at least twice the baseline value and above the upper limit ofthe normal range. None of the laboratory increases were associated with clinical symptoms.LipidsEndometriosis: In earlier clinical studies, 4% of the LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg patients and 1%of the danazol patients had total cholesterol values above the normal range at enrollment. Thesepatients also had cholesterol values above the normal range at the end of treatment.Of those patients whose pretreatment cholesterol values were in the normal range, 7% of theLUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg patients and 9% of the danazol patients had post-treatment valuesabove the normal range.The mean (\'b1SEM) pretreatment values for total cholesterol from all patients were 178.8(2.9) mg/dL in the LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg groups and 175.3 (3.0) mg/dL in the danazolgroup. At the end of treatment, the mean values for total cholesterol from all patients were193.3 mg/dL in the LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg group and 194.4 mg/dL in the danazol group.These increases from the pretreatment values were statistically significant (p<0.03) in bothgroups.Triglycerides were increased above the upper limit of normal in 12% of the patients whoreceived LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg and in 6% of the patients who received danazol.At the end of treatment, HDL cholesterol fractions decreased below the lower limit of thenormal range in 2% of the LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg patients compared with 54% of thosereceiving danazol. LDL cholesterol fractions increased above the upper limit of the normalrange in 6% of the patients receiving LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg compared with 23% of thosereceiving danazol. There was no increase in the LDL/HDL ratio in patients receivingLUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg but there was approximately a two-fold increase in the LDL/HDLratio in patients receiving danazol.In two other clinical trials, LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg dailywas evaluated for 12 months of treatment. LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was used as a controlgroup in one study. Percent changes from baseline for serum lipids and percentages of patientswith serum lipid values outside of the normal range in the two studies are summarized in thetables below. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 15 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 15 of 18Table 5SERUM LIPIDS: MEAN PERCENT CHANGES FROMBASELINE VALUES AT TREATMENT WEEK 24LUPRONLUPRON plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg dailyControlled Study (n=39)Controlled Study (n=41)Open Label Study (n=117)BaselineValue*Wk 24% ChangeBaselineValue*Wk 24% ChangeBaselineValue*Wk 24% ChangeTotal Cholesterol170.59.2%179.30.2%181.22.8%HDL Cholesterol52.47.4%51.8-18.8%51.0-14.6%LDL Cholesterol96.610.9%101.514.1%109.113.1%LDL/HDL Ratio2.0**5.0%2.1**43.4%2.3**39.4%Triglycerides107.817.5%130.29.5%105.413.8%*mg/dL**ratioChanges from baseline tended to be greater at Week 52. After treatment, mean serum lipidlevels from patients with follow up data returned to pretreatment values.Table 6PERCENTAGE OF PATIENTS WITH SERUM LIPIDVALUES OUTSIDE OF THE NORMAL RANGE*Includes all patients regardless of baseline value.Low HDL-cholesterol (<40 mg/dL) and elevated LDL-cholesterol (>160 mg/dL) are recognizedrisk factors for cardiovascular disease. The long-term significance of the observed treatment-related changes in serum lipids in women with endometriosis is unknown. Therefore assessmentof cardiovascular risk factors should be considered prior to initiation of concurrent treatmentwith LUPRON and norethindrone acetate.Uterine Leiomyomata (Fibroids): In patients receiving LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg, mean changes incholesterol (+11 mg/dL to +29 mg/dL), LDL cholesterol (+8 mg/dL to +22 mg/dL), HDL cholesterol (0to +6 mg/dL), and the LDL/HDL ratio (-0.1 to +0.5) were observed across studies. In the one study in whichtriglycerides were determined, the mean increase from baseline was 32 mg/dL.Other ChangesEndometriosis: The following changes were seen in approximately 5% to 8% of patients. In theearlier comparative studies, LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg was associated with elevations of LDHand phosphorus, and decreases in WBC counts. Danazol therapy was associated with increasesLUPRONLUPRON plus norethindrone acetate 5 mg dailyControlled Study(n=39)Controlled Study(n=41)Open Label Study(n=117)Wk 0Wk 24*Wk 0Wk 24*Wk 0Wk 24*Total Cholesterol (>240 mg/dL)15%23%15%20%6%7%HDL Cholesterol (<40 mg/dL)15%10%15%44%15%41%LDL Cholesterol (>160 mg/dL)0%8%5%7%9%11%LDL/HDL Ratio (>4.0)0%3%2%15%7%21%Triglycerides (>200 mg/dL)13%13%12%10%5%9% \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 16 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 16 of 18in hematocrit, platelet count, and LDH. In the hormonal add-back studies LUPRON DEPOT incombination with norethindrone acetate was associated with elevations of GGT and SGPT.Uterine Leiomyomata (Fibroids):Hematology: (See CLINICAL STUDIES section.) In LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg treated patients, althoughthere were statistically significant mean decreases in platelet counts from baseline to final visit, the lastmean platelet counts were within the normal range. Decreases in total WBC count and neutrophils wereobserved, but were not clinically significant.Chemistry: Slight to moderate mean increases were noted for glucose, uric acid, BUN, creatinine, totalprotein, albumin, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, LDH, calcium, and phosphorus. None of these increaseswere clinically significant.PostmarketingDuring postmarketing surveillance, the following adverse events were reported. Likeother drugs in this class, mood swings, including depression, have been reported. Therehave been rare reports of suicidal ideation and attempt. Many, but not all, of thesepatients had a history of depression or other psychiatric illness. Patients should becounseled on the possibility of development or worsening of depression duringtreatment with LUPRON.Symptoms consistent with an anaphylactoid or asthmatic process have been rarelyreported. Rash, urticaria, and photosensitivity reactions have also been reported.Localized reactions including induration and abscess have been reported at the siteof injection. Symptoms consistent with fibromyalgia (eg: joint and muscle pain,headaches, sleep disorder, gastrointestinal distress, and shortness of breath) havebeen reported individually and collectively. Other events reported are:Cardiovascular System \endash  Hypotension, Pulmonary embolism; Hemic and LymphaticSystem - Decreased WBC; Central/Peripheral Nervous System - Peripheral neuropathy,Spinal fracture/paralysis; Musculoskeletal System - Tenosynovitis-like symptoms;Urogenital System - Prostate pain.See other LUPRON DEPOT and LUPRON Injection package inserts for otherevents reported in different patient populations.OVERDOSAGEIn rats subcutaneous administration of 250 to 500 times the recommended human dose,expressed on a per body weight basis, resulted in dyspnea, decreased activity, andlocal irritation at the injection site. There is no evidence that there is a clinicalcounterpart of this phenomenon. In early clinical trials using daily subcutaneousleuprolide acetate in patients with prostate cancer, doses as high as 20 mg/day for up totwo years caused no adverse effects differing from those observed with the 1 mg/daydose. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 17 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 17 of 18DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATIONLUPRON DEPOT Must Be Administered Under The Supervision Of A Physician.Endometriosis: The recommended duration of treatment with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg aloneor in combination with norethindrone acetate is six months. The choice of LUPRON DEPOTalone or LUPRON DEPOT plus norethindrone acetate therapy for initial management of thesymptoms and signs of endometriosis should be made by the health care professional inconsultation with the patient and should take into consideration the risks and benefits of theaddition of norethindrone to LUPRON DEPOT alone.If the symptoms of endometriosis recur after a course of therapy, retreatment with a six-month course of LUPRON DEPOT monthly and norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily may beconsidered. Retreatment beyond this one six-month course cannot be recommended. It isrecommended that bone density be assessed before retreatment begins to ensure that values arewithin normal limits. LUPRON DEPOT alone is not recommended for retreatment. Ifnorethindrone acetate is contraindicated for the individual patient, then retreatment is notrecommended.An assessment of cardiovascular risk and management of risk factors such as cigarettesmoking is recommended before beginning treatment with LUPRON DEPOT and norethindroneacetate.Uterine Leiomyomata (Fibroids): Recommended duration of therapy with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg isup to 3 months. The symptoms associated with uterine leiomyomata will recur following discontinuation oftherapy. If additional treatment with LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg is contemplated, bone density should beassessed prior to initiation of therapy to ensure that values are within normal limits.The recommended dose of LUPRON DEPOT is 3.75 mg, incorporated in a depotformulation. The lyophilized microspheres are to be reconstituted and administeredmonthly as a single intramuscular injection. For optimal performance of the prefilleddual chamber syringe (PDS), read and follow the following instructions:1. To prepare for injection, screw the white plunger into the end stopper until thestopper begins to turn.2. Hold the syringe UPRIGHT. Release the diluent by SLOWLY PUSHING (6 to 8seconds) the plunger until the first stopper is at the blue line in the middle of thebarrel.3. Keep the syringe UPRIGHT. Gently mix the microspheres (particles) thoroughly toform a uniform suspension. The suspension will appear milky.4. Hold the syringe UPRIGHT. With the opposite hand pull the needle cap upwardwithout twisting.5. Keep the syringe UPRIGHT. Advance the plunger to expel the air from the syringe.6. Inject the entire contents of the syringe intramuscularly at the time of reconstitution.The suspension settles very quickly following reconstitution; therefore, LUPRONDEPOT should be mixed and used immediately.NOTE: Aspirated blood would be visible just below the luer lock connection if a bloodvessel is accidentally penetrated. If present, blood can be seen through the transparentLuproLoc\'99 safety device. \line -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \line Page 18 \line LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg Package InsertPage 18 of 18AFTER INJECTION7. Withdraw the needle. Immediately activate the LuproLoc\'99 safety device by pushingthe arrow forward with the thumb or finger until the device is fully extended and aCLICK is heard or felt.Since the product does not contain a preservative, the suspension should be discardedif not used immediately.As with other drugs administered by injection, the injection site should be variedperiodically.HOW SUPPLIEDLUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg is packaged as follows:Kit with prefilled dual-chamber syringeNDC 0300-3641-01Each syringe contains sterile lyophilized microspheres, which is leuprolide incorporatedin a biodegradable copolymer of lactic and glycolic acids. When mixed with diluent,LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg is administered as a single monthly IM injection.Store at 25\'b0C (77\'b0F); excursions permitted to 15-30\'b0C (59-86\'b0F) [See USP ControlledRoom Temperature]Rx onlyU.S. Patent Nos. 4,652,441; 4,677,191; 4,728,721; 4,849,228; 4,917,893; 5,330,767;5,476,663; 5,575,987; 5,631,020; 5,631,021; 5,716,640; 5,823,997; 5,980,488; and6,036,976.Other patents pending.Manufactured forTAP Pharmaceuticals Inc.Lake Forest, IL 60045, U.S.A.by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company LimitedOsaka, JAPAN 541TM- Trademark\'ae - Registered Trademark(No. 3641)03-5372-R18; Revised: August, 2004\'a91990-2004, TAP Pharmaceutical Products Inc.</html \line\line\f0\fs24\par
\f2\fs20\line\line\f0\fs24\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\par
   \par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
}
 