
   FRANKLYN ARANGO, PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 89-649

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1989

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Seventh Circuit

   Brief For The United States In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Questions Presented
   Opinion below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                             OPINION BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. A1-A14) is reported
at 879 F.2d 1501.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 17, 1989.
The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on September 15, 1989.
 The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                          QUESTIONS PRESENTED

   1. Whether the search of a Jeep that petitioner occupied
immediately before his arrest was validly conducted incident to that
arrest.

   2. Whether the district court abused its discretion in remedying a
Speedy Trial Act violation by dismissing petitioner's indictment
without prejudice.

                               STATEMENT

   Following a jury trial in the United States District Court for the
Northern District of Illinois, petitioner was convicted of possession
of 3438.9 grams of cocaine with intent to distribute it, in violation
of 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1);  conspiracy to possess cocaine, in violation
of 21 U.S.C. 846;  and assaulting a federal officer, in violation of
18 U.S.C. 111.  He was sentenced to concurrent terms of 10 years'
imprisonment to be followed by 10 years' supervised release on the
narcotics counts, and five years' probation on the assault count.

   1. On October 29, 1987, two Drug Task Force officers were
investigating narcotics trafficking on the north side of Chicago.
While on patrol, the officers received a radio message that a white
Jeep Cherokee without license plates had been seen in the area;  soon
thereafter, the officers saw a Jeep fitting that description and began
to follow it.  After the officials had followed the Jeep for about
nine blocks, the Jeep pulled over and two men got out.  Petitioner,
the passenger, and Tony Maldonado, the driver, were both wearing
digital beepers that were activated, indicating incoming calls.  Pet.
App. A2;  Gov't C.A. Br. 5-6.

   The officers approached the two men, identified themselves as
police officers, and asked for identification.  Maldonado gave the
officers a driver's license and the keys to the Jeep, but said he did
not know who owned it.  Petitioner told the officers that he had no
identification.  The officers frisked Maldonado and found $2,200 in
his jacket pocket.  Detective Clifford Berti then looked into the
Jeep, saw a wallet on the seat where petitioner had been sitting, and
opened the door of the Jeep to retrieve it.  While Detective Berti was
doing that, Sergeant Thomas Martin recognized petitioner as a suspect
in a recent narcotics-related shooting, and asked him whether the
police were still looking for him.  Petitioner immediately shoved
Sergeant Martin to the ground, breaking Martin's kneecap, and fled
with Maldonado.  Two nearby uniformed police officers gave chase, and
petitioner was caught about one block away.  Detective Berti arrested
petitioner for assaulting a police officer and conducted a pat-down
search.  The officers immediately brought petitioner back to Sergeant
Martin, who was lying on the street and in need of medical assistance.
 Pet. App. A2-A3;  Gov't C.A. Br. 5-7.

   Detective Berti then conducted a more thorough search of
petitioner's person and found $3,800 in cash and car keys.  Berti also
searched the Jeep and found $16,000, a package of cocaine on the back
seat, and several documents bearing petitioner's name in the glove
compartment.  The officers drove the Jeep to the DEA garage in
Chicago, where they searched it again.  That search turned up four
packages of cocaine in a secret compartment underneath the carpeting.
Pet. App. A4.

   2. Petitioner moved to suppress the evidence found in the Jeep.
After holding a hearing on March 8, 9, and 17, 1988, the court denied
petitioner's motion on July 15, 1988.  The court held that the
arrest-scene search of the Jeep was justified as a search incident to
petitioner's arrest.  The court also held that upon petitioner's
arrest, the officers had a right to secure the Jeep and to inventory
its contents.  Having found cocaine in the Jeep, the court added, the
officers had probable cause to search the Jeep thoroughly.  Gov't C.A.
Br. 2;  C.A. App. 78-83.

   On August 9, 1988, petitioner filed a motion to dismiss the
indictment for a violation of the Speedy Trial Act.  Because the
70-day time limit of the Act had been exceeded by 72 days, the
district court granted petitioner's motion.  The court, however, ruled
that the dismissal would be without prejudice.  Applying the factors
set forth in 18 U.S.C. 3162(a)(1), the court explained that the
narcotics charge involved "a significant amount of cocaine and was
serious";  the government was not at fault in the delay, which
resulted from the district court's misunderstanding of the status of
certain motions;  and the reprosecution of petitioner was consistent
with the purposes of the Speedy Trial Act and the administration of
justice.  Petitioner waived reindictment and was convicted by a jury
on all counts.  Pet. App. A4, A12;  C.A. App. 38.

   3. The court of appeals affirmed.  The court held that under New
York v. Belton, 453 U.S. 454 (1981), the search of the Jeep upon
petitioner's arrest was lawfully conducted incident to that arrest.
The court rejected petitioner's argument that the officers could not
search the passenger compartment of the Jeep because petitioner was
arrested nearly one block away.  The court explained that "under the
specific facts of this case, * * * the search of the vehicle as
incident to an arrest was entirely reasonable," because petitioner was
apprehended following his flight from the scene of Sergeant Martin's
assault and the officers had a "legitimate reason and a pressing need
to return petitioner to the scene of the assault immediately," to
attend to Martin's injuries.  Once petitioner was put "in proximity to
the jeep," the court reasoned, the search of the Jeep was appropriate
under Belton "to protect all persons as well as evidentiary items."
Pet. App. A8-A9.  Alternatively, the court held, even if the
arrest-scene search was improper, the cocaine would have been
inevitably discovered during a subsequent inventory search, which was
conducted at the DEA garage after the impoundment of the Jeep.  Id. at
A10-A11 n.2.

   The court of appeals also affirmed the district court's dismissal
of the indictment without prejudice.  The court stated that in
determining the appropriate remedy for the Speedy Trial Act violation,
the district court had properly applied the factors listed in 18
U.S.C. 3162(a)(1) and had not abused its discretion.  The court also
rejected petitioner's argument that the district court had improperly
based its remedy on "proof of guilt" derived from petitioner's
testimony at the suppression hearing.  The court noted that the
district court was required to consider the seriousness of the offense
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 3162(a)(1), and that it could properly consider
petitioner's testimony at the suppression hearing in so doing.  In
applying Section 3162(a)(1), the court said, the district judge "was
not deciding (petitioner's) guilt or innocence." Pet. App. A12-A14.

                               ARGUMENT

   1. Petitioner contends (Pet. 12-19) that the officers' on-the-scene
search of the Jeep cannot be justified as a search incident to his
arrest under New York v. Belton, 453 U.S. 454 (1981).  Petitioner
argues that the search was invalid because he was apprehended about a
block from the Jeep, and the search occurred only after he was
returned to the Jeep's vicinity.  That contention is without merit.

   In Belton, this Court established a bright-line rule to govern the
validity of a search of an automobile, incident to the arrest of one
of its occupants.  The Court noted that under Chimel v. California,
395 U.S. 752 (1969), police at the time of an arrest may search the
area within an arrestee's immediate control in order to protect the
arresting officers from weapons and to prevent the destruction of
evidence.  Belton, 453 U.S. at 457.  The Court recognized, however,
that the application of that rule had produced great uncertainty where
the "'area of immediate control of the arrestee' * * * arguably
includes the interior of an automobile and the arrestee is its recent
occupant." Id. at 460.  In order to provide a "straightforward" and
"workable" rule in that setting (id. at 459-460), the Court announced
that "when a policeman has made a lawful custodial arrest of the
occupant of an automobile, he may, as a contemporaneous incident of
that arrest, search the passenger compartment of that automobile," id.
at 460 (footnotes omitted), and containers found therein, id. at
457-460.

   In a wide variety of arrest situations, the courts of appeals have
applied Belton with a view toward preserving the clarity of its rule
permitting the search of automobile passenger compartments.  See
United States v. McKinnell, 888 F.2d 669, 672-673 (10th Cir. 1989)
("The search remains a valid search incident to arrest even if it
occurs after the suspect has been arrested, handcuffed, and placed
outside of the vehicle.");  United States v. Edwards, 885 F.2d 377,
383-384 (7th Cir. 1989);  United States v. Valiant, 873 F.2d 205,
206-207 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 110 S. Ct. 117 (1989);  United
States v. White, 871 F.2d 41, 44 (6th Cir. 1989) ("(O)ur consistent
reading of Belton has been that, once a police officer has effected a
valid arrest, that officer can search the area that is or was within
the arrestee's control.");  United States v. Lorenzo, 867 F.2d 561
(9th Cir. 1989) (per curiam);  United States v. Jorge, 865 F.2d 6,
9-10 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 109 S. Ct. 1762 (1989);  United States
v. Cotton, 751 F.2d 1146, 1148 (10th Cir. 1985);  United States v.
McCrady, 774 F.2d 868, 872 (8th Cir. 1985).  /1/ Likewise, the court
of appeals in this case properly applied the brightline rule of Belton
to the unique facts before it.

   Petitioner assaulted an officer shortly after getting out of the
Jeep.  He fled, but was promptly captured one block away.  The
officers conducted a pat-down search of petitioner and immediately
returned him to the scene of the assault so that they could get
medical assistance for the injured officer.  Once back at the scene of
the assault, the officers conducted a more thorough search of
petitioner's person and the interior of the nearby Jeep.  Those
searches were part of a single unbroken process of arresting
petitioner, a process that necessarily included returning petitioner
to the site of the assault so that the officers could attend to
Sergeant Martin.  Because petitioner was under a lawful custodial
arrest, and because he had occupied the Jeep immediately before his
arrest, the search was proper under Belton.

   Petitioner errs in contending (Pet. 13-14) that the search was
improper because he was returned to the Jeep after having been
formally placed under arrest a block away.  As both courts below
found, the officers acted reasonably in returning petitioner to the
scene of the assault, because Sergeant Martin needed assistance.  Once
the officials had returned to the scene, the rationale of Belton was
fully applicable.  The importance of an immediate search was
heightened by petitioner's demonstrated propensity for violence and
the fact that he was being held in the vicinity of the car while his
companion, Maldonado, was still at large.  This was not a case, as the
court of appeals expressly noted (Pet. App. A9), where the officers
brought an arrestee to a vehicle as a pretext for searching it.  /2/

   Even if the search of the Jeep was unjustified as a search incident
to petitioner's arrest, the evidence found in the Jeep was still
admissible.  In an alternative holding, the court of appeals ruled
that the officers would have inevitably discovered the cocaine in the
Jeep's passenger compartment during a routine inventory search at the
DEA garage.  Pet. App. A10-A11 n.2.  That holding was correct.

   Following petitioner's arrest, the officers had a clear need to
impound the Jeep.  Neither petitioner nor Maldonado was in a position
to take custody of the tagless vehicle:  petitioner was under arrest
for assaulting Sergeant Martin and Maldonado had absconded.  Having
impounded the Jeep, the officers were entitled to inventory its
contents.  Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367 (1987);  South Dakota v.
Opperman, 428 U.S. 364 (1976).  In the process, they obviously would
have discovered the package of cocaine that was lying on the back seat
beneath petitioner's jacket.  /3/ Thus, under Nix v. Williams, 467
U.S. 431 (1984), the evidence found in the Jeep was admissible
regardless of the validity of the arrest-scene search.  Accord United
States v. Andrade, 784 F.2d 1431, 1433 (9th Cir. 1986).

   2. Petitioner next argues (Pet. 21-23) that the indictment should
have been dismissed with prejudice because of a violation of the
Speedy Trial Act, 18 U.S.C. 3161 et seq.  In determining whether to
dismiss an indictment with or without prejudice, the court must
consider the seriousness of the offense, the facts and circumstances
of the case leading to the dismissal, and the impact of a
reprosecution on the administration of the Speedy Trial Act and on the
administration of justice.  See United States v. Taylor, 108 S. Ct.
2413, 2419 (1988);  18 U.S.C. 3162(a)(1).  The application of those
factors is committed to the district court's discretion.  Ibid.  The
district court did not abuse its discretion in this case when it
dismissed petitioner's indictment without prejudice, permitting the
government to reinstate the charges and ultimately convict petitioner.

   Petitioner's offense -- possession of 3438.9 grams of cocaine with
intent to distribute it -- was unquestionably a serious one, weighing
heavily in favor of dismissal without prejudice.  In addition, the
circumstances of the dismissal supported reprosecution.  The cause of
the speedy trial violation was the district court's misunderstanding
of the extent to which pretrial motion delay is excluded under the
Act.  See Henderson v. United States, 476 U.S. 321, 326-330 (1986)
(excludable delay attributable to a pretrial motion usually ends 30
days after the hearing is completed).  Petitioner did not ask the
court to rule more promptly on his pending motion, and there was no
bad faith or intentional delay on the part of the government.
Finally, petitioner was not prejudiced by the delay.  Pet. App.
A12-A13.  Those factors fully justified the district court's decision.

   Petitioner also argues (Pet. 19-21) that the district court should
not have considered his suppression-hearing testimony in applying
Section 3162(a)(1), because such consideration forces a defendant into
a "Hobson's choice";  according to petitioner, a defendant in such a
position may forgo his right to a speedy trial if he chooses to assert
his Fourth Amendment rights.  Pet. 21.  There is no merit to that
claim.  The Court has held that "when a defendant testifies in support
of a motion to suppress evidence on Fourth Amendment grounds, his
testimony may not thereafter be used against him at trial on the issue
of guilt unless he makes no objection." Simmons v. United States, 390
U.S. 377, 394 (1968) (emphasis added).  That rule has never been
extended to a case in which the government's subsequent use of
suppression-hearing testimony does not involve establishing guilt.
Compare United States v. Salvucci, 448 U.S. 83, 93-94 (1980) ("This
Court has not decided whether Simmons precludes the use of a
defendant's testimony at a suppression hearing to impeach his
testimony at trial.").  Petitioner's guilt or innocence was not at
issue in determining whether the offense with which he was charged was
"serious" for purposes of the Speedy Trial Act;  hence, the conflict
of constitutional interests identified by Simmons is not present here.
 Cf. United States v. Baker, 850 F.2d 1365, 1370 (9th Cir. 1988)
(Simmons does not bar government from obtaining a superseding
indictment based on defendant's testimony at trial which ends in a
mistrial);  United States v. Hernandez, 779 F.2d 227 (5th Cir. 1985)
(Simmons does not bar the use of suppression-hearing testimony at
sentencing), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 1119 (1986).  /4/

   Nor does the rationale of Simmons aid petitioner.  Petitioner was
in no sense placed in the type of dilemma Simmons sought to avoid.  In
Simmons, the Court observed that "a defendant who knows that his
testimony may be admissible against him at trial will sometimes be
deterred from presenting the testimonial proof * * * necessary to
assert a Fourth Amendment claim." 390 U.S. at 392-393.  When
petitioner testified at his suppression hearing, however, he could not
possibly have "known" that there might be a future Speedy Trial Act
violation.  That violation occurred only when the district court
failed to decide his suppression motion within 30 days of the hearing.
 Consequently, unlike the defendant in Simmons, petitioner was not
forced to choose between testifying at his suppression hearing and
giving up some known right.  /5/

   At all events, the district court's consideration of petitioner's
testimony would not have made a difference in the court's ruling on
the remedy issue.  The seriousness of petitioner's offense was
manifest from the charges in the indictment and from the seizure of
the cocaine itself.  Petitioner's admission at the suppression hearing
that he possessed a large quantity of cocaine was merely cumulative of
other information before the court.  Consequently, even if
petitioner's admission had not been considered, the outcome of his
speedy trial motion would have been the same.  Any error in the
district court's consideration of petitioner's testimony was therefore
harmless.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   EDWARD S.G. DENNIS, JR.

      Assistant Attorney General

   PATTY MERKAMP STEMLER

      Attorney

   JANUARY 1990

   /1/ A few cases involving distinguishable facts have found Belton
inapplicable.  In United States v. Vasey, 834 F.2d 782, 785-788 (9th
Cir. 1987), the court found that a search was not contemporaneous
under Belton when, unlike in this case, 30 or 45 minutes had elapsed
between the placement of defendant in rear of police car and the
search.  Cf. United States v. Lorenzo, supra.  In United States v.
Fafowora, 865 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1989), the arrest took place when
the arrestees were walking away from a car that they had parked
following a chase by DEA agents, 865 F.2d at 361, and the court held
that "the passenger compartment of the (car) was not within the
'immediate surrounding area' into which (the arrestees) might have
reached at the time the DEA agents caught up with them," id. at 362.
Here, in contrast, the court of appeals found that at the time of the
search, petitioner's "proximity to the jeep" made its search
"appropriate to protect all persons as well as evidentiary items."
Pet. App. A9.

   /2/ Citing Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42 (1970), petitioner
argues (Pet. 13) that because his arrest and the search of the Jeep
were not simultaneous, the search cannot be sustained as incident to
his arrest.  The court of appeals, however, specifically rejected the
argument that "the delay between (petitioner's) capture and the
initial pat-down and the subsequent search of the vehicle was
significant enough to destroy (its) 'nearly contemporaneous' aspect."
Pet. App. A9.  Only a few minutes elapsed between petitioner's
apprehension and the search.

   /3/ That discovery, in turn, would have permitted the full-scale
search of the Jeep that resulted in the discovery of additional
cocaine in the concealed compartment beneath the carpeting.  See
United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 798 (1982) (permitting warrantless
search of all areas of a car that may contain items that the police
have probable cause to believe are there).

   /4/ The courts of appeals have also declined to apply Simmons to
the use of pretrial testimony at the trial itself, where, as in this
case, there is no showing that "one constitutional right (must) be
surrendered in order to assert another." 390 U.S. at 394.  See United
States v. Boruff, 870 F.2d 316 (5th Cir. 1989) (Simmons inapplicable
to bar government's use at trial of testimony of witness called by
defendant in suppression hearing), cert. denied, 110 S. Ct. 160
(1989);  United States v. Clawson, 831 F.2d 909, 912 (9th Cir. 1987)
(Simmons does not bar use at trial of defendant's affidavit for return
of property voluntarily filed in state court), cert. denied, 109 S.
Ct. 303 (1988);  United States v. Dohm, 618 F.2d 1169, 1174 (5th Cir.
1980) (en banc) (Simmons does not bar the use at trial of the
defendant's testimony in bail hearings).  Compare United States v.
Kahan, 415 U.S. 239, 243 (1974) (per curiam) (defendant who perjured
himself at a pretrial hearing to obtain appointed counsel could not
invoke Simmons to bar the use of that testimony at trial, because the
defendant did not surrender "what was 'believed' * * * to be a 'valid'
constitutional claim").

   /5/ Nor would any future defendant have reason to be deterred from
testifying in a pretrial hearing because of a speculative, future
Speedy Trial Act violation.  The possibility of such an event coming
to pass is simply too remote.
