





FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:  October 24, 1989

           FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION WILL SEEK TO HALT
                 IMO INDUSTRIES' ACQUISITION OF
                     OPTIC-ELECTRONIC CORP.


     The Federal Trade Commission today authorized its staff to
seek a preliminary injunction barring New Jersey's Imo Industries
Inc.'s $69 million acquisition of outstanding shares of Texas'
Optic-Electronic Corp. ("OEC"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of
United Scientific Holdings plc ("USH"), a British corporation.

     The Commission said that it had reason to believe that the
proposed acquisition could substantially reduce competition in
the production of certain image intensifier night vision tubes
sold primarily to the defense industry.

     Image intensifier tubes are the major components of various
night vision devices.  They are used to enhance the ability to
see at night by amplifying available illumination to visible
levels.  Image intensifier devices take light from natural
sources, such as moonlight or starlight, or from a man-made
source, like a laser beam, and magnify it many times.  The
devices project objects in a green-tinted image that is visible
to the human eye.  

     Imo is based in Lawrenceville, N.J., and OEC is based in
Garland, Texas.  They are two of the largest manufacturers of the
products in the United States.

     The Commission's application to a federal district court
will ask that the acquisition be blocked pending administrative
proceedings to determine the legality of the purchase.  Under
federal law, if the court grants preliminary relief, the
Commission must issue an administrative complaint beginning such
proceedings within 20 days.

                              # # #

MEDIA CONTACT:      Brenda A. Mack, Office of Public Affairs
                    202-326-2182

STAFF CONTACT:      James C. Egan, Bureau of Competition
                    202-326-2682

FTC File No. 891 0105)
(Imo-OEC)
