66 FR 11555, February 26, 2001
                                                     A-588-837 
                                                     AR: 09/98-08/99 
                                                     Public Document


MEMORANDUM TO: Bernard T. Carreau, fulfilling the duties of
               Assistant Secretary for Import Administration

FROM:          Richard W. Moreland
               Deputy Assistant Secretary, Group 1
               Office of AD/CVD Enforcement 


SUBJECT:       Issues and Decision Memorandum for the Antidumping Duty
               Administrative Review on Large Newspaper Printing Presses 
               and Components Thereof, Whether Assembled or Unassembled, 
               from Japan - September 1, 1998, through August 31, 1999

Summary 

We have analyzed the comments of the interested parties in the 1998-1999
administrative review of the antidumping duty order covering large newspaper
printing presses and components thereof, whether assembled or unassembled, from
Japan. As a result of our analysis of the comments received from interested
parties, we have made changes in the margin calculations as discussed in the
"Margin Calculations" section of this memorandum. We also recommend that you
approve the positions we have developed in the "Discussion of the Issues"
section of this memorandum. Below is the complete list of the issues in this
administrative review for which we received comments from parties:


1. Universe of Home Market Sales 

2. Date of Sale 

3. Time Period for Selling Expense and Cost Ratios 

4. Denominator of the Profit and Selling Expense Ratios Used in Constructed
   Value

5. Allocation of General and Administrative Expenses to Further Manufacturing

6. Denominator of the General and Administrative Expense Ratio Applied to
   Further Manufacturing

7. Credit Expenses for the Pre-Production Period

8. Credit Expenses for the Post-Production Period 


Background 

On October 19, 2000, the Department of Commerce (the Department) published the
preliminary results of the administrative review of the antidumping duty order
on large newspaper printing presses and components thereof, whether assembled
or unassembled (LNPP), from Japan. See Large Newspaper Printing Presses and
Components Thereof, Whether Assembled or Unassembled, From Japan: Preliminary
Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, 65 FR 62700 (Oct. 19, 2000)
(Preliminary Results). The product covered by this order is LNPP. The period of
review (POR) is September 1, 1998, through August 31, 1999.


We invited parties to comment on our preliminary results of review. Based on
our analysis of the comments received, we have changed the results from those
presented in the preliminary results.


Margin Calculations


We calculated constructed export price (CEP) and normal value using the same
methodology stated in the preliminary results, except as follows:


標e based the general and administrative (G&A) and financing expense ratios
for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd. (MHI) and Tokyo Kikai Seisakusho, Ltd.
(TKS) on data shown on each company's audited financial statements for the
fiscal year ending in 1999, rather than on a weighted average of the amounts
shown on the financial statements for the fiscal years ending in 1999 and 2000.
See Comment 3. 


標e used MHI's home market indirect selling expenses reported in the 1996-1998
administrative review, rather than the indirect selling expenses reported in
this administrative review. See Comment 3. 


標e recomputed the profit and selling expense ratios used in constructed value
in order to include installation in the denominator of our calculations. See
Comment 4. 


標e recalculated MHI's further manufacturing costs to include certain G&A
expenses not reported by the company. See Comment 6. 


標e recalculated U.S. credit expenses using a yen-based short-term interest
rate for the time period between the beginning of production and the date of
installation completion. Thereafter, we calculated credit on the amount of the
unpaid balance of the sales price, using a U.S. dollar-denominated interest
rate. See Comments 7 and 8. 


標e recalculated home market credit expenses for the time period between the
date of installation and the date of final payment using the unpaid balance of
the sales price in order to account for the post-installation financing of the
respondents' accounts receivable. See Comments 7 and 8. 

Discussion of the Issues


Comment 1: Universe of Home Market Sales


For purposes of the preliminary results, the Department based normal value for
both of the respondents in this proceeding on constructed value. In defining
the "universe" of sales from which we derived profit and selling expense
information, we used the respondents' home market sales which were made during
the 12-month period beginning with the three months prior to each company's
first U.S. sale. MHI argues that the manner in which the Department selected
this universe is contrary to the law and the Department's precedent. 


According to MHI, the Department's practice in determining the relevant
universe of home market sales, for both this case and most other proceedings,
is to use all home market sales made during the POR. MHI notes that the
Department departed from this practice for purposes of the preliminary results,
when it ignored home market sales made during the POR and instead focused on
sales which were made closer to the date of the U.S. sale. MHI contends that
this new methodology is inconsistent with the implicit requirements of section
773(b) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (the Act) (i.e., the section
relating to sales below cost). Specifically, MHI maintains that this section is
explained by the Statement of Administrative Action (SAA), which states that
the Department "will examine below-cost sales occurring during the entire
period of investigation or review, as opposed to a shorter time period." (1)
See Uruguay Round Agreements Act, H.R. Doc No. 103-316, Vol. 1, at 807, 831
(1994), reprinted in 1994 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3773 (SAA). MHI infers from this
statement that the Department does not have the discretion to conduct a sales-
below-cost test (and by extension to calculate constructed value profit) on
sales made during any randomly selected period, but rather must use sales made
during a period which at a minimum includes the entire POR.


MHI asserts that the Department's decision not to base the home market
universe on the POR in this case is especially untenable in that the record
demonstrates that there is a significant overlap between the production period
for MHI's U.S. sale and the POR. According to MHI, the Department recognized
the statutory importance of the production period in its decision memorandum on
this topic when it quoted section 773(e)(2)(A) of the Act, which states that
constructed value profit "is derived from the amounts incurred and realized on
the production and sale of the foreign like product in the ordinary course of
trade."


In the event that the Department does not restrict the universe of home market
sales to those made during the POR, MHI argues that the Department should use
home market sales from an extended time period which includes the entire POR.
MHI asserts that the Department adopted the "extended POR" approach in
Mechanical Transfer Presses from Japan; Preliminary Results of Antidumping Duty
Administrative Review, and Intent to Revoke Order in Part, 63 FR 11211, 11213-
14 (Mar. 6, 1998) (MTPs from Japan). (2) Specifically, MHI notes that in that
case, the Department used home market sales made during the POR, as well as
those made during the contemporaneous period (i.e., sales which would have been
used to match had the Department made price-to-price comparisons). MHI asserts
that the practice set forth in MTPs from Japan is particularly apt here,
because, like mechanical transfer presses, LNPP are large, customized products
that are manufactured over an extended period of time.


According to MHI, if the Department abandons its precedent of using the POR as
the basis of the home market sales universe due to contemporaneity concerns,
then the Department must use sales which "reasonably correspond" to the U.S.
sale. MHI asserts that, under the Department's standard practice when making
price-to-price comparisons, the Department defines a "time reasonably
corresponding" to U.S. sales as the period beginning with the three months
prior to the month of the U.S. sale and ending with the two months afterwards
(i.e., the "90/60" day window (3)). MHI asserts that, since constructed value
is intended to be a surrogate for a comparable home market price, the same
standards for identifying contemporaneous sales for constructed value profit
should apply. According to MHI, the sales used for purposes of the preliminary
results were not selected using this "standard" methodology, as claimed in the
Department's decision memorandum on this topic, but rather using a "90/240 day"
window. MHI argues that this period is inappropriate because it is both random
and inconsistent with the definition of contemporaneity set forth in the
regulations.


In any event, MHI argues that the Department must exclude one of MHI's home
market sales from its margin calculations because the facts on the record of
this administrative review demonstrate that this sale has not yet been
completed and has a date of sale after the POR.


The petitioner asserts that the Department's basis for calculating constructed
value profit on home market sales contemporaneous with MHI's U.S. sale was
consistent with the statute, applicable regulations, and the Department's
precedent. The petitioner notes that the regulations define the "period of
review" as the time period delineating the universe of entries, exports, or
sales of subject merchandise to the United States, and that both the statute
and regulations are silent on the time period requirements for home market
sales. Rather, the petitioner asserts that the universe of home market sales
examined during a proceeding depends on the facts of a particular case and is
not a fixed, immutable period. 


Specifically, the petitioner notes that section 771(16) of the Act merely
defines home market sales of foreign like product as merchandise which can be
reasonably compared with the merchandise sold to the United States. The
petitioner asserts that the Department has a long-established practice of
giving a high priority to contemporaneity in determining which products can be
reasonably compared. The petitioner notes that this practice (i.e., the "90/60"
rule noted above), normally results in a universe of home market sales which is
longer than the POR, because it also includes the three months before the
first, and the two months after the last, U.S. sale. According to the
petitioner, the Department's practice is to use these non-POR sales in its
analysis, not only when making price-to-price comparisons but also when
performing the cost test and calculating constructed value. See Certain
Stainless Steel Wire Rods From France: Final Results of Antidumping Duty
Administrative Review, 63 FR 30185, 30187 (June 3, 1998) (SSWR from France). 


The petitioner contends that MHI's claim for statutory support for its POR-
based profit argument is misplaced. Specifically, the petitioner notes that
this claim is based entirely on one sentence in the SAA (i.e., "Commerce will
examine below-cost sales during the entire period of review, as opposed to a
shorter period"). However, the petitioner asserts that MHI misinterpreted this
statement, because: 1) it does not relate to the appropriate period for
calculating CV profit; and 2) the reference to the POR time period is simply
meant to direct the Department to apply the below-cost test over at least 12
months of sales. (4)


In contrast, the petitioner maintains that there is no requirement that the
appropriate profit rate be derived using POR data at all. Rather, the
petitioner argues that this rate should be the "normal" profit that the seller
was making on its home market sales at the time that it made the U.S. sale.
According to the petitioner, given the nature of LNPP manufacturing,
profitability can swing wildly from year-to-year. Thus, the petitioner argues
that basing the profit rate on home market sales made during the POR would
result in a non-contemporaneous match of MHI's normal value to its U.S. sale,
because the POR fell during the company's 1999/2000 fiscal year while the U.S.
sale was made in January 1998.


In addition, the petitioner contends that the Department must balance the need
for contemporaneity in terms of both when prices are set and costs are
incurred. According to the petitioner, the choice of a window more heavily-
weighted to the period subsequent to the U.S. sale clearly establishes the
balance for this particular case. Specifically, the petitioner notes that the
majority of the home market sales used in the Department's analysis were
manufactured in the same fiscal year as MHI's U.S. sale, whereas most of the
POR home market sales were manufactured in the subsequent fiscal year. (5)


Finally, notwithstanding MHI's assertions to the contrary, the petitioner
states that the Department is not bound by the "90/60 day" rule in defining the
universe of sales used as a basis for constructed value profit. Rather, the
petitioner contends that the Department's practice is to establish the pool of
contemporaneous home market sales, and then to base the profit calculation on
the manufacturing costs associated with all of the sales within the pool.
According to the petitioner, using a "90/60" principle would require separate
profit calculations for each month in which there was a U.S. sale, a result
which is clearly contrary to the Department's practice.


Department's Position:


Although the home market was viable for both respondents in this proceeding,
we based normal value on constructed value in accordance with section 773(a)(4)
of the Act, because we determined that the unique, custom-built nature of each
LNPP sold does not permit proper price-to-price comparisons. See Preliminary
Results, 65 FR at 62702. Thus, the issue in this case is what constitutes the
appropriate universe of home market sales from which to derive CV profit data.


When calculating constructed value, the Act directs the Department to
determine, or "construct," the value of the U.S. sale as if this sale had been
made in the home market. Specifically, section 773(e) of the Act instructs the
Department to calculate constructed value as the cost of materials and
fabrication of the imported product, plus amounts for selling, general, and
administrative expenses incurred and profits earned in connection with the
production and sale of a foreign like product, in the ordinary course of trade,
for consumption in the foreign country.


The Department's practice in establishing the appropriate profit rate for
constructed value is to calculate the average profit realized on all sales in
the home market which would normally be considered in its analysis (i.e., all
sales within the time period for which data was collected, made in the ordinary
course of trade). See SSWR from France, 63 FR at 30187. Generally, in reviews
this is approximately 17 months of sales data, because the time period over
which home market sales data is collected includes the 12 months of the POR
plus all sales made within the "90/60 day" window. (6) However, the Act does
not mandate the length of the home market period examined, (7) nor does it
require the use of sales made during the POR. See section 773(e)(2)(A) of the
Act.


Thus, the question is simply what universe of sales we would normally use in
our analysis. Under section 773(a)(1)(A) of the Act, the normal value of the
subject merchandise is defined as the price of the foreign like product sold at
a time which reasonably corresponds to the time of the sale used to determine
the export price or CEP. This time period is further defined by section
777A(d)(2) of the Act and 19 CFR 351.414(e)(2) as the month that corresponds
most closely to the month of the U.S. sale, within the six month "window"
around that sale. Consequently, contrary to MHI's assertion, the appropriate
universe of home market sales is dependent upon the timing of a respondent's
sales to the United States. (8)


Accordingly, in defining the universe of home market sales for this
proceeding, we have identified all home market sales of foreign like product
made at a time which reasonably corresponds to the time of each respondent's
U.S. sale. Due to the custom-built nature of the products under consideration
(and thus the long lag time between sale of the merchandise and its final
installation at the customer's site) (9), the resulting pool of sales for each
respondent begins prior to the POR. Specifically, the universe of sales
examined for MHI begins in October 1997, while the universe for TKS begins in
July 1998. In addition, because we concluded that there are reasonable grounds
to believe or suspect that each respondent made sales in the home market at
prices below their cost of production (COP), we find that it is appropriate to
examine at least 12 months of home market sales data for each company. (10)
Thus, the universe of sales examined for MHI and TKS ends in September 1998 and
June 1999, respectively. (11)


We disagree with MHI that the particular universe examined in our analysis for
MHI is inappropriate. Contrary to MHI's assertions, we find that the majority
of the manufacturing activity related to the company's U.S. sale did not occur
during the POR. Rather, we note that production for the product in question
began in early 1998, well before the start of the POR, and the main component
was completely produced and shipped by the end of that year. Thus, including in
our universe home market sales which were sold during the POR, as suggested by
MHI, would have led to home market manufacturing periods which were less, not
more, contemporaneous with the U.S. manufacturing period.


Consequently, we have continued to define the universe of home market sales
using the date of the relevant U.S. transactions for purposes of the final
results.


Comment 2: Date of Sale


MHI had one sale to the United States covered by this administrative review.
For purposes of the preliminary results, the Department used the date on which
the letter of award was signed by MHI and its customer as the date of sale for
this transaction, because we found that this document set forth the essential
terms of sale between the parties. The petitioner argues that the Department
instead should use the date on which the official contract was signed because
the letter of award does not specify all of the terms of sale, including
technical specifications, warranty terms, and installation requirements.


Specifically, the petitioner contends that the letter of award was a
preliminary document akin to a "handshake," which signified no more than a
reservation of space, materials, and resources for manufacturing and
engineering in the LNPP company's production cycle. In contrast, the petitioner
notes that MHI used the date of contract in the home market as the date of
sale, and that MHI characterized its home market letters of award as merely
"agreements in principle" that do not contain detailed descriptions of the
terms of sale. 


At a minimum, therefore, the petitioner argues that if the Department finds
the date of the letter of award as the appropriate date of the U.S. sale, the
Department should similarly find that the date of the letter of award is the
appropriate date for all home market sales. The petitioner notes that, under
this revised date of sale methodology, it is possible that MHI did not
completely report all of its home market sales. As a consequence, the
petitioner argues that the Department should base the calculation of
constructed value profit on facts available. As facts available, the petitioner
asserts that the Department should use the constructed value profit rate from
the prior segment of this proceeding, calculated using MHI's contemporaneous
home market sales.


MHI argues that the Department should continue to use the date of the letter
of award as the date of sale for its U.S. transaction. MHI states that use of
this date is consistent with the Department's long-standing policy for large,
custom-made equipment that the date of sale should be the earliest date on
which the essential terms of sale are fixed and the parties express their
intent to be bound by those terms. See, e.g., Notice of Final Determination of
Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Large Newspaper Printing Presses, Whether
Assembled or Unassembled, From Japan, 61 FR 38139, 38159 (July 23, 1996) (LNPP
from Japan Final Determination) and Final Determination of Sales at Less Than
Fair Value: Mechanical Transfer Presses from Japan, 55 FR 335, 341 (Jan. 4,
1990) (MTPs from Japan Final Determination). According to MHI, the Department
verified that, after signing the letter of award, neither MHI nor its customer
made substantial alterations in the terms of sale to which the had parties
agreed (including price, payment terms, and other essential terms). Indeed, MHI
notes that the letter of award was a binding legal document, complete with
provisions for compensation to the parties in the event of non-compliance with
the terms.


Furthermore, MHI disagrees with the petitioner that its use of the contract
date as the home market date of sale is an inconsistent application of its date
of sale methodology. MHI notes that the company does not issue letters of award
for all home market sales. In addition, MHI states that, in cases where the
company does issue such letters, they generally do not contain detailed
descriptions of the terms of sale, including in some instances firm prices.
Thus, MHI contends that the Department should continue to use contract date as
date of sale in the home market.


Department's Position: 


For purposes of this administrative review, we have continued to use the date
on which the U.S. letter of award was signed for the U.S. date of sale because
we find that this date best reflects the date on which the essential terms of
sale were first established. Although the term "sale" is not defined in either
the Act or the regulations, the Department finds that a sale exists when the
parties agree upon the basic terms of their commercial arrangement. See MTPs
from Japan Final Determination, 55 FR at 341. The Department normally uses the
date of invoice, recorded in an exporter's or producer's records which have
been kept in the ordinary course of business, as the date of sale for subject
merchandise or foreign like product. See 19 CFR 351.401(i). However, according
to the Department's regulations, "the Secretary may use a date other than the
date of invoice if the Secretary is satisfied that a different date better
reflects the date on which the exporter or producer establishes the material
terms of sale." Id. 


When defining the material terms of sale, the Department usually focuses on
when the price and quantity for a particular product are set. See, e.g., Final
Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Polyvinyl Alcohol from Taiwan,
61 FR 14064, 14067 (Mar. 29, 1996). However, the Department makes
determinations as to what constitutes the material terms of sale on a case-by-
case basis. Thus, our practice with respect to the LNPP industry has been to
consider the following terms of sale "essential" (i.e., having the ability to
materially affect the net pricing of the product): specifications, price,
payment terms, warranty terms, and installation requirements. See Notice of
Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Large Newspaper Printing
Presses and Components Thereof, Whether Assembled or Unassembled, From Germany,
61 FR 38166, 38182 (July 23, 1996) (LNPP from Germany Final Determination). 


In this case, we have reviewed the letter of award signed by MHI and the
Bergen Record. Based on this examination, we find that this document was not
only legally binding on the parties, but it also was the first document which
established the essential terms of sale for this transaction. Specifically, it
set forth the price of the LNPP in question with a corresponding payment
schedule, the specifications of the product, and the installation requirements.
Moreover, although the warranty terms were not explicitly stated, the letter of
award provided for the product to be sold on a turnkey basis with a period of
several months between the date of installation (and the resulting start of
commercial activity) and final acceptance by the customer. Thus, we find that
the letter of intent provided an implied warranty period.


Regarding MHI's home market sales, we note that for the majority of the home
market sales used in the Department's analysis for purposes of preliminary
results, MHI did not issue letters of award (12) to its customers prior to the
signing of the LNPP contracts. See the MHI home market sales verification
report, dated September 29, 2000, at Exhibit 6. Moreover, upon review of three
letters of award which are contained on the record of this proceeding, we find
that none of these letters established all of the essential terms defined
above. (13) Consequently, because there is no indication that the letters of
award signed for the home market sales in this review set the essential terms
of sale between MHI and its home market customers, we continue to find that the
contract date constitutes the appropriate date of sale for home market sales.
We note, however, that we will examine the letters of award in future segments
of this proceeding; if these letters set forth the essential terms of sale in
future segments, we will reexamine this issue.


Because the Department has determined that MHI correctly reported the dates of
sale for all home market sales, we have not based the calculation of MHI's
constructed value profit on facts available. 


Comment 3: Time Period for Selling Expense and Cost Ratios


As noted in Comment 1, above, the Department derived MHI's constructed value
profit and selling expense information using home market sales made in the 12-
month period beginning at the end of 1997. MHI reported certain of these sales
in its supplemental questionnaire responses, along with their corresponding
COPs. (14)


The petitioner contends that MHI did not report the actual costs incurred on
these LNPP sales with respect to indirect selling expenses, G&A, research and
development (R&D), and certain cost variances, as required by the Department's
questionnaire. Instead, the petitioner alleges that MHI reported these costs
from a time period which succeeds the period in which MHI incurred these
expenses. According to the petitioner, the effect of MHI's failure to match its
home market sales with their actual production costs overstates the COPs
reported and, correspondingly, understates constructed value profit (and, by
extension, the dumping margin).


Specifically, the petitioner argues that MHI based the indirect selling
expenses reported for the home market sales in question on the ratios
calculated for the 12-month period ending September 1999. However, the
petitioner maintains that the indirect selling expenses related to these
transactions were incurred during the time period in which the sales were
negotiated, which was well before 1999. According to the petitioner, the
principle of matching revenues with expenses dictates that the Department
should reject MHI's reported indirect selling expense ratio and instead base
these expenses on facts available. As facts available, the petitioner proposes
that the Department use the indirect selling expense ratio that MHI reported in
the previous segment of this proceeding which covers the period October 1996
through September 1998.


Regarding R&D, the petitioner also alleges that MHI calculated R&D for the
home market sales in question using a ratio based on a time period later than
that in which these sales were made (i.e., the fiscal year ending in 1999).
Therefore, the petitioner asserts that none of these additional sales actually
benefitted from the R&D activities which were used to calculate the R&D ratio.
Additionally, the petitioner asserts that the R&D ratio includes certain types
of product development R&D which was not performed for these transactions and
should, therefore, be excluded from the margin calculations. Finally, the
petitioner alleges that MHI did not properly apply the R&D ratio to its
manufacturing costs in order to calculate the R&D expenses reported to the
Department. According to the petitioner, the Department should base R&D on
facts available, (15) or at a minimum should confirm that MHI properly applied
the reported ratios in its calculations.


Regarding variances, the petitioner asserts that MHI calculated the costs for
the additional home market sales by applying combined variances for 1999 and
2000. According to the petitioner, because most of the manufacturing activity
for these sales occurred prior to 2000, the Department should recalculate these
cost variances using the contemporaneous time period.


According to MHI, it fully and timely complied with the Department's expense
reporting requirements. With respect to indirect selling expenses and R&D, MHI
argues that these expenses are period expenses which, by their nature, do not
correspond to specific sales. Further, MHI argues that the product development
R&D included in its reported R&D ratio did, in fact, benefit LNPP sales because
it related to new feature development for existing product lines; as a
consequence, MHI argues that it should not be excluded from the margin
calculations. Finally, MHI stated that the petitioner misunderstood the
methodology used to calculate the R&D and cost variance ratios, which were
properly derived. (16) Accordingly, MHI contends that the Department should
accept its indirect selling expenses, R&D, and cost variances as reported for
purposes of the final results.


Department's Position:


We agree with MHI regarding the calculation of its R&D, G&A and variance
expense ratios and the application of these ratios in its submissions. MHI
correctly used the audited financial statements that most closely corresponded
to the production of the home market and U.S. sales to calculate its G&A and
R&D expenses. We also agree with MHI that such costs are period expenses and do
not directly relate to specific sales. Period expense categories such as G&A,
R&D, and interest expense capture all expenses incurred during a company's
standard reporting period (i.e., its fiscal year). Therefore, the Department
typically uses the audited fiscal year financial statement that most closely
corresponds to the POR to calculate period expense ratios. 


In this case, however, due to the unique nature of the product and the sales
process within this industry, production of significant portions of the
merchandise under consideration occurred over a lengthy time period that began
prior to the POR and ended in both respondents' fiscal year 2000, which
succeeds the POR. Accordingly, for the preliminary results, we had used G&A and
interest expense ratios based on MHI's and TKS's fiscal year 1999 and 2000
audited financial statements. Upon further review, however, we note that
although production costs were incurred in fiscal year 2000 for both the U.S.
and home market sales with respect to both respondents, the majority of
production of the merchandise under consideration occurred in fiscal year 1999.
Therefore, for purposes of these final results, we have determined that it is
most appropriate to base the G&A and interest expense ratios for both
respondents on their 1999 audited financial statements.


Regarding R&D, we agree with MHI regarding the inclusion of certain types of
product development R&D expenses in its reported costs. The Department treats
R&D as period expenses, which is consistent with U.S. Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP). The R&D expenses incurred in each fiscal period
may benefit both current and future operations. Furthermore, R&D expenses
incurred for LNPP feature development do apply to the merchandise under
consideration and are correctly included in the reported costs. 


In addition, we agree with MHI that the correct cost variances were reported
in its August 11, 2000 submission. Contrary to the petitioner's assertion, MHI
did not apply an overall average cost variance from either of its fiscal years
ended 1999 or 2000, or a variance from a combination of years. Rather, MHI
allocated variances by production shop by fiscal year, which were verified by
the Department. See the MHI cost verification report, dated September 26, 2000,
at page 27.


With regard to indirect selling expenses, however, we agree with the
petitioner that we should use MHI's indirect selling expenses that were
incurred during a time period contemporaneous to the universe of home market
sales. While we agree that the time period for the reported indirect selling
expenses will never correspond exactly to the date of sale for the home market
sales under consideration, we find that it is appropriate to use indirect
selling expenses incurred during the same general time frame. We note that the
time period for MHI's reported indirect selling expenses (i.e., October 1998
through September 1999) bears no relationship to that of the home market sales
universe (i.e., October 1997 thorough September 1998). Thus, we have
reconsidered our use of the reported expenses for purposes of the final results.


Because the indirect selling expense data reported in the previous
administrative review comprises the period October 1996 through September 1998,
we agree with the petitioner that this data is more representative of MHI's
indirect selling expense experience for the home market sales used in our
analysis. Accordingly, as non-adverse facts available, we have used MHI's
indirect selling expenses reported in the 1996-1999 administrative review. This
data can be found in the February 15, 2001, memorandum from Jim Nunno to the
file entitled "Placement of Business Proprietary Information on the Record of
the 1998-1999 Administrative Review."


Comment 4: Denominator of the Profit and Selling Expense Ratios Used in
Constructed Value


For purposes of the preliminary results, we calculated constructed value
profit as the total profit earned on home market sales which were made at
prices above their COP. We expressed this profit as a percentage of the total
home market COP, less installation expenses. We then applied this profit ratio
to constructed value, which did not include the cost of installation in the
United States.


MHI argues that the methodology used in the preliminary results improperly
overstated the profit and selling expenses used to calculate constructed value,
because installation expenses were excluded from the denominator of the profit
ratio. Specifically, MHI argues that this methodology results in the
Department's calculating the total amount of profit applicable to the U.S. sale
at the constructed value stage; however, because the Department is also
required to calculate CEP profit (in addition to constructed value profit), it
has double-counted the portion of profit attributable to U.S. operations. MHI
notes that the Department recognized this fact in previous segments of this
proceeding, because it included installation expenses in the denominator of the
constructed value profit calculation in the less-than-fair-value (LTFV)
determination, as well as in the prior administrative review. (17)


The petitioner contends that the Department correctly excluded installation
expenses from the denominator of the constructed value profit ratio. According
to the petitioner, a standard principle in antidumping calculations is that the
denominator of a ratio calculation should approximate as closely as possible
the same body of expenses as the number to which the ratio is applied. In
support of this contention, the petitioner cites Notice of Final Determination
of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Dynamic Random Access Memory Semiconductors
of One Megabit and Above ("DRAMs") From Taiwan, 64 FR 56308, 56312 (Oct. 19,
1999) and Notice of Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Live
Cattle From Canada, 64 FR 56739, 56756 (Oct. 21, 1999). The petitioner argues
that, because the Department applied the constructed value profit ratio to COP
excluding installation expenses, it properly limited the denominator for the
ratio calculation to cost without installation. Nonetheless, the petitioner
maintains that, if the Department deems it necessary to include installation
expenses in the constructed value profit ratio, it should apply that ratio to a
pool of costs which includes installation.


Department's Position:


In previous segments of this proceeding, as well as in this administrative
review, we included installation costs in the COP rather than deducting them
from the contract price in order to determine whether MHI's home market sales
were made below the COP. See the September 29, 2000, memorandum from Jim Nunno
to the file entitled "Calculations Performed for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries,
Ltd. (MHI) for the Preliminary Results in the Antidumping Duty Administrative
Review of Large Newspaper Printing Presses and Components Thereof, Whether
Assembled or Unassembled, from Japan," at page 3. For purposes of calculating
CEP, we classified installation charges as part of further manufacturing
because the U.S. installation process involves extensive technical activities
on the part of engineers and installation supervisors. See Preliminary Results,
65 FR at 62702; and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries v. United States, 15 F. Supp.
2d. 807, 815-16 (CIT 1998) (MHI v. United States). This methodology recognizes
the classification of installation expenses as part of the manufacturing costs
and not as direct selling expenses that would be deducted from the contract
price in determining whether home market sales were made below the COP. 


In the previous segments to this proceeding, as noted by MHI, we calculated
the constructed value profit and selling expense ratios using a denominator
inclusive of installation expenses. For purposes of the preliminary results in
this administrative review, we removed the installation expenses from the
denominator based on our normal practice of calculating profit and selling
expense ratios using a denominator that includes the same cost components as
the constructed value to which it is applied. However, by subtracting these
expenses from the denominator, we introduced a clerical error into our
calculation program by double-counting the effect of profit attributable to
U.S. operations.


Accordingly, we have revised our calculation of the constructed value profit
and selling expense ratios to properly include installation expenses in the
denominator for purposes of the final results.


Comment 5: Allocation of G&A to Further Manufacturing


In its questionnaire response, MHI allocated G&A expenses to its U.S. further
manufacturing operations on the basis of headcount. For purposes of the
preliminary results, we reallocated these G&A expenses using the cost of sales
of MHI's U.S. subsidiary, MLP.


MHI argues that the reallocation of G&A on the basis of cost of sales is
inappropriate because it significantly overstates the portion of MLP's
resources applied to LNPP. Specifically, MHI asserts that, although LNPP are
relatively high in cost, they comprise only a small fraction of MLP's business
activities. For example, MHI notes that MLP had only two LNPP customers during
the POR, but it had numerous sheetfed and commercial web press customers.
According to MHI, this disparity in the number of customers also created a
corresponding disparity in the resources necessary to support them (i.e., MLP
had to perform more credit checks, issue more invoices, purchase more parts,
and make more accounting entries in its general ledger for sheetfed and
commercial web press sales). MHI notes that, for this reason, MLP uses a
headcount methodology to allocate G&A to LNPP sales in its ordinary books and
records.


MHI argues that, while a cost of sales approach may be the Department's normal
approach for allocating G&A expenses, the Department must consider other
options when this allocation methodology is inconsistent with the commercial
reality under which these G&A expenses were incurred. Indeed, MHI contends that
the Department has used headcount to allocate G&A in other cases where, as
here, the expenses were related to a company's human resource and accounting
functions which varied by the number of employees (rather than its cost of
sales). See, e.g., Circular Welded Non-Alloy Steel Pipe From the Republic of
Korea; Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, 63 FR 32833,
32847 (June 16, 1998) (Steel Pipe from Korea) and Dynamic Random Access Memory
Semiconductors of One Megabit or Above From the Republic of Korea; Final
Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review, 61 FR 20216, 20217 (May 6,
1996) (DRAMs from Korea).


According to the petitioner, the Department correctly allocated MLP's G&A
expenses to LNPP using the company's cost of sales. The petitioner notes that
the Department's practice in general, and for LNPP in particular, is to use a
cost of sales allocation methodology when there is no clear evidence that doing
so would unreasonably state G&A expenses. See, e.g., Final Determination of
Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Certain Carbon and Alloy Steel Wire Rod from
Canada, 59 FR 18791, 18795 (Apr. 20, 1994) and LNPP from Japan Final
Determination, 61 FR at 38141, 38148-49. According to the petitioner, there is
no new evidence in the record of this administrative review that would warrant
a change in methodology. Rather, the petitioner asserts that MHI expends more
senior management, travel, entertainment, and administrative effort on higher
value-added activities related to LNPP sales and operations, and incurs more
overhead to secure LNPP contracts.


According to the petitioner, MHI's reliance on Steel Pipe from Korea and DRAMs
from Korea is misplaced. Specifically, the petitioner notes that the
respondents in both of those cases allocated some indirect selling expense
items by value and others by headcount. Moreover, the petitioner notes that,
unlike here, the Department accepted and verified the headcount methodology in
Steel Pipe from Korea. The petitioner asserts that, because of the unique,
extensive, and costly character of LNPP production, it would be inappropriate
to use a headcount allocation methodology in this case.


Department's Position:


We disagree with MHI that MLP's G&A expenses should be allocated based on
headcount and specific product line allocations. Although we considered MHI's
suggested alternative method, our analysis of the evidence on the record of
this administrative review indicates that, in this case, a headcount method
does not result in an allocation that is more accurate than that resulting from
a cost of sales method. (18)


Neither the SAA nor the Act prescribes a specific method for allocating G&A
expenses to specific products. We further note that U.S. GAAP does not address
the allocation of period costs such as G&A to individual products. When a
statute is silent or ambiguous on the manner in which the Department must
perform its calculations, the determination of a reasonable and appropriate
method is left to the discretion of the Department. Thus, the Department has,
over time, developed a consistent and predictable practice for calculating and
allocating G&A expenses. This consistent and predictable method is to calculate
the rate based on the company-wide G&A costs incurred by the producing company
allocated over the producing company's company-wide cost of sales and not on a
divisional or product line basis. This practice is identified in sections D & E
of the Department's standard antidumping questionnaire, which instructs that
the G&A expense rate should be calculated as the ratio of total company-wide
G&A expenses divided by cost of goods sold. See, e.g., section E of the
questionnaire at page E-11. 


G&A expenses encompass a broad range of expense items that are more closely
related to the accounting period rather than to any specific product or
service. Moreover, G&A expenses relate to the activities of the company as a
whole rather than to specific production processes. For example, a company must
maintain some level of personnel, facilities, and management to plan and
coordinate business strategies, corporate financing, accounting, and personnel
functions. The U.S. Court of International Trade has upheld the Department's
position that "G&A expenses are those expenses which relate to the activities
of the company as a whole rather than to the production process." Rautaruukki
Oy v. United States, Slip Op. No. 95-56 (CIT Mar. 31, 1995). The CIT has
reaffirmed this position in its decision that "Commerce's decision that offsets
to G&A expenses should also be related to the company's general operations -
comprised of all general activities associated with the company's core
business, including production of the subject merchandise - is a reasonable
application of the statute." U.S. Steel, et al. v. United States, Slip Op. No.
98-17 (CIT Feb. 25, 1998). 


The general activities and period cost concepts have led the Department, with
few exceptions, to allocate G&A expenses proportionally based on the cost of
sales of specific products. The cost of sales allocation method accounts for
the fact that G&A expenses consist of a wide range of different types of costs,
unrelated or indirectly related to the production process, and prevents
distortions in marginal profits. 


We disagree with MHI's argument in this case that certain G&A expenses would
be more accurate if allocated based on a single factor (e.g., headcount). While
a few specific expenses within the broader category of G&A expense might bear
some correlation to certain business activities, the correlations remain
indirect at best. Moreover, the remaining expenses within the G&A expenses
category bear no relationship to headcount. In contrast, the Department's
normal method for allocating G&A costs based on cost of sales takes into
account all production factors (i.e., materials, installation labor, and
installation overhead) rather than a single arbitrarily chosen factor, such as
headcount. Because we found no evidence that our normal G&A allocation method
unreasonably states G&A costs, we allocated such costs for the final results
based on cost of sales, in accordance with our practice. (19) See Notice of
Final Determination of Sales Less Than Fair Value: Certain Cut-to-Length Carbon
Steel Plate From South Africa, 62 FR 61731, 61736 (Nov. 19, 1997). See also MHI
v. United States, 15 F. Supp. 2d. at 817-18 (allocation of G&A based on cost of
sales rather than headcount is appropriate).


We also found unpersuasive the respondent's claim that the cost of sales
approach in an LNPP case significantly overstates the portion of MLP's
resources applied to LNPP relative to the other types of presses sold. While
MLP presented some information in support of its claim, we did not find this
information sufficiently compelling to deviate from our normal method of
allocating G&A expenses based on a percentage of cost of goods sold. Due to the
proprietary nature of the facts underlying our analysis we cannot discuss them
in this forum. Therefore, for further discussion, see the February 15, 2001,
memorandum from Michael P. Harrison to Neal Halper entitled "Constructed Value
Calculation Adjustments for the Final Determination" (the MHI cost calculation
memo).


Therefore, for the final results we have allocated G&A expenses based on MLP's
cost of sales, rather than by product line or headcount. We believe that,
absent compelling reasons to the contrary, a reasonable, consistent, and
predictable approach is more appropriate in allocating G&A costs.


Comment 6: Denominator of the G&A Ratio Applied to Further Manufacturing


The petitioner argues that MHI improperly calculated the G&A ratio associated
with MLP's further manufacturing operations. Specifically, the petitioner
asserts that MHI excluded certain G&A expenses related to MLP's non-LNPP
business divisions from the numerator of the G&A ratio applied to further
manufacturing while including the cost of sales for these divisions in the
denominator of the same calculation. The petitioner maintains that this
calculation significantly understates MLP's G&A ratio, and asserts that the
Department should, therefore, recalculate the further manufacturing G&A ratio
to exclude all costs associated with commercial web operations from the
denominator.


MHI contends that it properly calculated the G&A ratio in question. According
to MHI, the petitioner's argument is premised on a misunderstanding of the
nature of the expenses included in the numerator of the G&A ratio. MHI asserts
that it included all expenses associated with common, company-wide G&A expenses
in its calculation, rather than those solely related to sales of LNPP. (20) MHI
further asserts that, at verification, the Department reconciled the components
of this calculation to MLP's audited financial statements without noting any
discrepancies. Thus, MHI argues that recalculating MLP's G&A ratio to exclude
all costs associated with commercial web operations from the denominator would
introduce an unsupportable distortion into the calculation, because it would
result in the allocation of all common costs solely to LNPP.


Department's Position:


We agree with MHI in part. At verification we found that MLP included in the
numerator of its G&A ratio costs which related to the general operations of the
company as a whole, rather than only those costs which were incurred to sell
LNPP. Thus, the denominator must include the cost of sales of all products. We
further found that MLP excluded costs identified as indirect selling expenses
and costs that were assigned to the company's direct cost centers. See MLP Cost
verification report, dated October 12, 2000, at page 9. While we agree with MHI
that it was appropriate to exclude those costs identified as indirect selling,
we disagree that it was appropriate to exclude certain G&A costs which MHI
claims relate solely to non-LNPP product lines. These costs were not recognized
as a part of cost of sales specific to a particular product line on MLP's
audited financial statements. Rather, they were treated as period costs,
relating to the general operations of the company as a whole. See Comment 5,
above, for further discussion of G&A allocation.


Therefore, we find that MLP's submitted G&A expense ratio is understated and
have accordingly added the excluded general operating expenses to the numerator
in the G&A ratio calculation. Further, we continued to use in the denominator
costs attributable to all of MLP's product lines. See the MHI cost calculation
memo for further discussion.


Comment 7: Credit Expenses for the Pre-Production Period


For purposes of the preliminary results, we calculated imputed credit expenses
for both respondents' U.S. sales using a "project financing" approach. (21)
Under this methodology, we calculated the net difference between receipts and
expenditures for each quarter between the time that production of the LNPP
systems began and the time that all costs were completely incurred. We then
calculated an imputed financing expense related to this difference using a
short-term interest rate denominated in the currency of the U.S. sale.


MHI argues that the Department should revise its calculations to use a short-
term interest rate denominated in Japanese yen for the project financing cost
incurred prior to the shipment of the merchandise from Japan. According to MHI,
this cost is more analogous to an inventory carrying cost (which is intended to
measure the expense of financing merchandise from the time it enters finished
goods inventory to the time that it is shipped to the first unrelated customer)
than it is to an imputed credit expense (which is intended to measure the cost
of financing receivables from the time that the merchandise is shipped to the
first unrelated customer to the time that the customer remits payment). MHI
notes that the Department normally applies an interest rate denominated in the
home market currency while the merchandise is in the home market and a U.S.
dollar interest rate when the merchandise is in the United States, according to
the entity in the production and sales chain which bears the risk of carrying
the merchandise. MHI contends that the risk of carrying the LNPP in question is
borne in Japan prior to its shipment to the United States, and thus a yen-based
rate is appropriate for this portion of the expense.


The petitioner agrees that the Department should compute pre-shipment
financing costs using a yen-based rate. The petitioner notes that: 1) the
Department concluded in the LNPP investigation that the type of interest rate
used should depend on the currency of the factor to which the rate is applied
(see LNPP from Japan Final Determination, 61 FR at 38160); and 2) the factor in
the pre-shipment phase is the cost of producing the subject merchandise, which
is incurred primarily in the local currency.


According to the petitioner, even if the respondents receive their installment
payments in U.S. dollars, they must convert most of these payments into yen in
order to finance local expenses. Moreover, the petitioner asserts that by using
a higher U.S. dollar interest rate to calculate interest revenue on U.S. sales
while using a yen interest rate to calculate interest revenue on a home market
sale, the Department effectively is granting more credit to an early payment on
a U.S. sale than to an equally early payment made on a home market sale. The
petitioner maintains that such a practice is entirely inconsistent with the
Department's rationale for granting an imputed credit adjustment in the first
place. 


Department's Position:


For most products in antidumping duty proceedings, production costs are
financed independently of sales transactions, and the manufacturer normally
ships a finished good for which the customer subsequently submits payment. In
the case of LNPP, each LNPP requires substantial capital during the production
period, which may extend over two to three years including the design phase.
Accordingly, LNPP projects generally require the purchaser to provide scheduled
progress payments before completion of a project. These payments serve to
provide the manufacturer with the production financing necessary to produce
each large, customized product. 

To account for both the financing costs incurred and the progress payments
received prior to installation, the Department developed a methodology in the
LTFV investigations which offsets the production costs incurred by the payments
received throughout the construction period, up to the date that installation
is complete. Once the product is completely installed on the customer's
premises, the normal application of imputed credit is applied to the period
from the date of installation completion to final payment date.


Based on the Department's consideration of comments received in this
proceeding, as well as our continued examination of the LNPP industry
throughout these proceedings, we have revised our methodology associated with
calculating imputed credit.


Regarding the short-term interest rate used in this calculation, we agree with
MHI and the petitioner that, for the period during which the merchandise is
under production, it is more appropriate to use the short-term interest rate
denominated in Japanese yen for the project financing cost incurred by the
respondents. (22) Accordingly, we have revised our methodology to apply the
home market interest rate for the production financing portion of the imputed
credit calculation in light of the following facts: 1) the amounts being
"financed" prior to installation are production costs; and 2) substantially all
of these costs are incurred in the home market currency. In order to properly
implement this methodology, we revised MHI's calculation of imputed credit for
its home market and U.S. sales using the "project financing" approach described
above for only the period of time prior to installation completion. Because
this issue does not relate to MHI alone, we also revised TKS's imputed credit
calculation in order to be consistent in this proceeding. For the post-
installation portion of the calculation, see Comment 8, below. 


Comment 8: Credit Expenses for the Post-Production Period


The petitioner argues that the Department should impute post-production credit
expenses for MHI's home market and U.S. sales using: 1) a credit period from
the date that shipment is completed to the date of payment; and 2) the sales
price, rather than the cost. The petitioner contends that this methodology is
consistent with the Department's practice of calculating credit expenses in the
vast majority of cases. At a minimum, however, the petitioner contends that the
Department should consistently apply the methodology used for the preliminary
results in the companion case on LNPP from Germany (see Large Newspaper
Printing Presses and Components Thereof, Whether Assembled or Unassembled, from
Germany: Preliminary Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Reviews, 64 FR
62695 (Oct. 19, 2000) (LNPP from Germany)), where imputed credit expenses were
set to zero as of the date of shipment when total revenues exceeded total costs.


According to the petitioner, the methodology used for purposes of the
preliminary results is inconsistent with the methodology used in the LTFV
investigation. Specifically, the petitioner asserts that the Department
calculated imputed credit on the basis of the difference between expenditures
and revenues over the whole financing period for this segment of the
proceeding, whereas in the LTFV stage separate expenses were calculated during
the construction and post-shipment periods. The petitioner notes that the
current methodology results in the calculation of negative financing costs
after the shipment date, as long as the installments received prior to shipment
exceed the foreign direct cost of manufacturing. According to the petitioner,
this result is unreasonable because it does not accurately reflect the seller's
post-shipment opportunity cost.


MHI contends that the Department should continue to calculate credit expenses
using the methodology employed in the preliminary results. According to MHI,
the petitioner's argument rests on a misunderstanding of when delivery actually
occurs in the LNPP industry. MHI maintains that delivery is not complete, nor
is it recognized by the customer, until the time that the LNPP is installed at
the customer's premises. MHI asserts that this statement is supported by the
fact that the Department treats installation as a continuation of the
manufacturing process (i.e., further manufacturing). Moreover, MHI notes that,
contrary to the petitioner's assertions, the Department treated installation as
part of the "construction period" during the LTFV investigation and
consequently calculated financing costs for purposes of this administrative
review in the same manner as in that segment of the proceeding.


Regarding the petitioner's comment about setting the negative credit expenses
to zero, MHI asserts that the petitioner mischaracterized the Department's
methodology in the Germany case. According to MHI, in that case the Department
netted the pre- and post- shipment costs without disregarding negative amounts.
Thus, MHI argues that the Department should continue to follow the same imputed
credit methodology used in the preliminary results (except as noted in Comment
7, above) for purposes of the final results.


Department's Position:


As explained in our position to Comment 7, above, we developed a methodology
in the LTFV investigation using a "project financing" approach until the date
of installation, and then using our normal methodology of calculating imputed
credit from the date of installation to final payment date. (23) Contrary to
MHI's assertions, we did not follow this methodology for purposes of the
preliminary results in this proceeding. Rather, for the preliminary results we
calculated imputed credit on the basis of the difference between expenditures
and revenues over the entire financing period. 

Based on the comments received in this proceeding, we have reconsidered this
approach. Specifically, we find that the methodology developed in the LTFV
investigation yields a result which is more representative of the imputed
financing costs associated with selling LNPP. Given that production is
substantially completed after the merchandise is installed on the customer's
premises, we find that it is appropriate to apply our "normal" credit
methodology after this point.

Accordingly, we have revised MHI's imputed credit calculations for both home
market and U.S. sales in order to calculate imputed credit related to both pre-
installation project financing (as described above in Comment 7), and to the
post-installation financing of its accounts receivable. (24) Using information
reported by MHI, we defined the post-production period using the number of days
between the date on which installation was completed and the date of any
subsequent payments. (25) We then calculated imputed credit for this post-
production period by applying the interest rate corresponding to the currency
of the accounts receivable (i.e., U.S. dollars for the U.S. sale and Japanese
yen for the home market transactions) to any outstanding payment values after
the date of installation, in accordance with our practice. See Imputed Credit
Expenses and Interest Rates, Policy Bulletin 98.2 (Feb. 23, 1998). See also
Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Oil Country Tubular Goods
from Austria, 60 FR 33551, 33555 (June 28, 1995). Finally, we added the pre-
installation and post-installation imputed credit amounts to compute the total
imputed project financing expense. Because this issue does not relate to MHI
alone, we also revised TKS's reported home market and U.S. credit expenses in
order to be consistent in this proceeding. See MHI Final Calculation
Memorandum, and the February 15, 2001, memorandum from Jim Nunno to the file
entitled and "Calculations Performed for Tokyo Kikai Seisakusho, Ltd. (TKS) for
the Final Results," for the details of this calculation.

Recommendation

Based on our analysis of the comments received, we recommend adopting all of
the above positions. If these recommendations are accepted, we will publish the
final results of review and the final weighted-average dumping margins for the
reviewed firms in the Federal Register.





Agree____ Disagree ____ 



Bernard T. Carreau, fulfilling the duties of
Assistant Secretary for Import Administration

(Date) 



_____________________________________________________________________________
footnotes:

1. MHI acknowledges that section 773(e) of the Act does not specify which home
market sales should be used to calculate profit for constructed value. 

2. MHI asserts that the final results of review made no change in this
methodology. See Mechanical Transfer Presses from Japan; Final Results of
Antidumping Duty Administrative Review and Revocation of Antidumping Duty
Administrative Order in Part, 63 FR 37331 (July 10, 1998). 

3. The "90/60 day" window is codified in the Department's regulations at 19
CFR 351.414(e)(2). 

4. The petitioner notes that the Department is directed to determine whether
sales were made below cost within an extended period of time which is defined
by section 773(b)(2)(B) of the Act as a period that is normally one year, but
not less than six months. 

5. The petitioner contends that, in its case brief, MHI misstated both the
commencement and ending dates of production for its U.S. sale. Due to a claim
for proprietary treatment, these dates cannot be discussed here. For further
discussion, see pages 9 and 10 of the petitioner's rebuttal brief. 

6. This is true because respondents generally make U.S. sales throughout the
POR, including in the first and last months. 

7. Indeed, the Department may use a smaller universe of home market sales when
the circumstances warrant. This fact is reflected in the standard antidumping
questionnaire issued in administrative reviews, which states: 

Because contemporaneous sales must be used to determine normal value, the
reporting period for these sales depends on the dates of sale for the U.S.
sales you report in response to Section C of this questionnaire. Report all
sales of the foreign like product during the three months preceding the
earliest month of U.S. sales, all months from the earliest to the latest month
of U.S. sales, and the two months after the latest month of U.S. sales. If this
is less than twelve months in total, please contact the official in charge
immediately.

See page 1 of the section B questionnaire. As implied by this language, the
Department's normal practice is to solicit at least 12 months of sales data in
proceedings involving sales-below-cost investigations, in order to determine
whether below-cost sales were made within an extended period of time as
required by section 773(b)(1)(A) of the Act. 

8. Although the SAA references sales made during the POR in conducting the
cost test, we disagree with MHI's assertion that the SAA requires the
Department to define the relevant universe of home market sales using a fixed
period which is independent of the universe of U.S. sales under review. Indeed,
the sentence in question does not direct the Department to use sales made
during a specific time period at all in performing the cost test. Rather, it
directs us to use all home market sales under consideration in determining
whether sales at below-cost prices were made in substantial quantities and
should be disregarded (instead of sales made in a minimum number of months).
See SAA at page 831. To interpret this statement otherwise would not allow the
Department to perform the cost test on sales outside the POR which must be
considered for determining normal value, a result clearly at odds with the
intent of the Act. 

9. Unlike in the vast majority of the antidumping cases before the Department,
the U.S. dates of sale for LNPP in a given review may precede the POR by a year
or more, in light of the requirement that the respondents' U.S. sales must have
been fully delivered and installed before the transactions can be reviewed. 

10. This time period is in accordance with the Department's practice of
normally using at least 12 months of home market sales in order to determine
whether any below-cost home market sales were made within an extended period of
time in substantial quantities at prices which do not permit recovery of costs. 

11. We agree with MHI that the sale identified in its case brief should be
excluded from our analysis because the date of sale for this transaction was
after September 1998. 

12. MHI refers to the documentation which is signed by MHI and its home market
customers to signify their intention to enter into contracts as "letters of
intent." For purposes of this memorandum, these documents are referenced as
"letters of award." 

13. For further discussion of the terms of sale contained in the letters of
award in question, see the February 15, 2001, memorandum from Jim Nunno to the
file entitled "Calculations Performed for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.
(MHI) for the Final Results" (MHI Final Calculation Memorandum). 

14. MHI reported these sales pursuant to the Department's June 30, 2000,
supplemental questionnaire which requested that MHI report all of its home
market LNPP sales with contract dates falling within three months before and
two months after the month of the U.S. sale. MHI reported the additional sales
on July 11, 2000, and August 11, 2000. 

15. The petitioner, however, does not suggest what constitutes appropriate
facts available for MHI's R&D. 

16. Specifically, MHI notes that the R&D ratio was calculated by taking total
R&D expenses divided by total cost of sales, rather than total manufacturing
costs (as stated by the petitioner). Regarding the cost variances, MHI states
that it calculated variances for each sale based on the year and production
shop in which the cost was incurred for the contract in question. According to
MHI, the Department examined each of these calculations in detail at
verification. 

17. In addition, MHI asserts that this methodology is contrary to the intent
of section 773(e)(2)(A) of the Act, in that this section requires the
Department to base constructed value selling expenses and profit on the actual
amounts incurred and realized in connection with the production and sale of the
foreign like product. MHI implies that, by not including installation expenses
in the denominator of the calculation, the Department did not treat it as part
of the LNPP production process. 

18. Contrary to MHI's claim that MLP allocates G&A expenses to specific
products in the ordinary course of business using a headcount method, we note
that MLP did not allocate these general expenses at issue to specific products
in its audited financial statements. 

19. In regards to the two cases cited by MHI, Steel Pipe from Korea and DRAMs
from Korea, the Department allowed some indirect selling expenses, not G&A, to
be allocated using the headcount methodology. 

20. MHI notes that the only expenses excluded from the numerator of its
calculation were those expenses associated with MLP's direct cost centers. 

21. MHI's and TKS's customers were responsible for paying for the subject
merchandise in installments on the dates specified in the sales contracts,
prior to the shipment of the merchandise in question. 

22. We observe that, unlike with most other products, the manufacturer's
production responsibility is not fulfilled when the LNPP is shipped from the
factory. The manufacturer continues to work on the production of the LNPP until
it is installed at the purchaser's site. Until that point, the manufacturer
still incurs costs associated with the production and installation of the LNPP.
Thus, in the unique case of LNPP, it appears to be more appropriate to consider
the installation completion date, rather than shipment date, as the point at
which the manufacturer incurs an opportunity cost for the unpaid portion of the
sale (i.e., where the unpaid balance becomes an accounts receivable). 

23. The petitioner was incorrect in its assertion that in LNPP from Germany we
set the imputed credit expenses to zero as of the date of shipment when total
revenues exceeded total costs. Rather, we used the respondent's calculation
methodology in which it calculated imputed credit using the "project financing"
approach (described above in Comment 7) up to the date of shipment, and then
the normal methodology of financing its accounts receivable from the date of
shipment to final payment date. In order to be consistent with these final
results, we have revised our methodology in the final results of the LNPP from
Germany administrative review using the date of installation completion rather
than the date of shipment. See the "Issues and Decision Memorandum" for the
final results the LNPP from Germany administrative review released by the
Department on the same date of this memorandum. 

24. We have treated both components of this expense as direct because both are
related directly to the sales in question. 

25. Although MHI's reported credit calculation spreadsheets indicated either
months or quarters in which it received payments for its home market sales, we
did not have the specific payment dates on the record for certain home market
sales reported by MHI. In addition, MHI and TKS did not provide the specific
date during the month in which certain expenses were incurred. Accordingly, we
used as facts available the midpoint of each applicable time period as the date
of payment or expense in question.
