
   NORFOLk AND WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, ET AL., PETITIONERS V.
AMERICAN TRAIN DISPATCHERS ASSOCIATION, ET AL. CSX TRANSPORTATION,
INC., PETITIONER V. BROTHERHOOD OF RAILWAY CARMEN, ET AL.

   No. 89-1027, 89-1028

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1989

   On Writs Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of Appeals For
The District Of Columbia Circuit

   Brief For The Federal Respondents Supporting Petitioners

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statutory provision involved
   Statement
      A. Statutory framework
      B. Proceedings below
         1. No. 89-1027
         2. No. 89-1028
         3. The court of appeals' decision
   Summary of argument
   Argument:
      Under 49 U.S.C. 11341(a), a party that has entered
      into a merger approved by the Commission is exempt
      from any legal obligation imposed by a collective
      bargaining agreement, to the extent such an exemption
      is necessary to implement the merger
          A. The text of Section 11341(a) makes clear
             that participants in an ICC-approved
             merger are exempt from all legal
             obstacles, including obligations under
             collective bargaining agreements, that
             may jeopardize the implementation of the
             merger
          B. The legislative history of Section 11341(a)
             confirms that ICC-approved mergers are
             exempt from all legal obstacles, including
             collective bargaining agreements, that
             may jeopardize the implementation of the
             merger
             1. The Transportation Act of 1920
             2. The Emergency Railroad Transportation
                Act of 1933
             3. The Transportation Act of 1940
          C. The court of appeals' decision cannot be
             squared with the purpose of the ICA consolidation
             provisions
          D. The court of appeals erroneously declined
             to defer to the Commission's construction
             of Section 11341(a)
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-26a) is reported
at 880 F.2d 562.  /1/ The court of appeals' order of September 29,
1989 (Pet. App. 27a-28a), amending its prior opinion, is unreported.
The opinion of the Interstate Commerce Commission in No. 89-1027 (Pet.
App. 29a-46a) is unreported;  the Commission's opinion in No. 89-1028
(89-1028 Pet. App. 33a-52a) is reported at 4 I.C.C.2d 641.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 25, 1989.
Petitions for rehearing in both cases were denied on September 29,
1989 (Pet. App. 49a-50a).  The petitions for a writ of certiorari in
both cases were filed on December 28, 1989, and were granted on March
26, 1990.  The jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).
/2/

                     STATUTORY PROVISION INVOLVED

   49 U.S.C. 11341(a) provides in pertinent part:

   Scope of authority

         The authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission under
      this subchapter is exclusive.  A carrier or corporation
      participating in or resulting from a transaction approved by or
      exempted by the Commission under this subchapter may carry out
      the transaction, own and operate property, and exercise control
      or franchises acquired through the transaction without the
      approval of a State authority.  A carrier, corporation, or
      person participating in that approved or exempted transaction is
      exempt from the antitrust laws and from all other law, including
      State and municipal law, as necessary to let that person carry
      out the transaction * * *.

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether, under 49 U.S.C. 11341(a), a party that has entered into a
merger approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission is exempt from
the legal obligations imposed by a collective bargaining agreement, to
the extent such an exemption is necessary in order to implement the
merger.

                               STATEMENT

   The Interstate Commerce Commission has broad authority to examine,
condition, and approve proposed rail carrier consolidations.  In the
two cases presented, the Commission approved the merger of rail
systems and, as a condition of its approval, imposed certain labor
protective requirements, intended to soften the impact of the merger
on affected employees.  Some years later, the merged carriers sought
to carry out the approved consolidation by integrating into a single
facility services then being performed at separate outlets.  Because
the proposed integration entailed adverse impacts for employees,
however, the respondent unions invoked their rights under existing
collective bargaining agreements and requested negotiations under the
Railway Labor Act (RLA), 45 U.S.C. 151 et seq.

   Reviewing the decision of arbitration committees, the Commission
sustained the proposed integrations -- thereby precluding enforcement
of the conflicting terms of the collective bargaining agreements.  The
agency relied, in part, on Section 11341(a) of the Interstate Commerce
Act, under which parties to an ICC-approved consolidation are exempt
"from all other law, including State and municipal law, as necessary
to let that person carry out the transaction." 49 U.S.C. 11341(a).
The court of appeals reversed the Commission's decision, holding that
Section 11341(a) applies only to "positive enactments, not common law
rules of liability, as on a contract." Pet. App. 18a.  Accordingly,
the court ruled, Section 11341(a) does not exempt carriers from their
legal obligations under collective bargaining agreements -- including
those obligations that may jeopardize implementation of an
ICC-approved consolidation.

   A. Statutory Framework

   Chapter 113 of the Interstate Commerce Act (ICA, or Act), 49 U.S.C.
11031 et seq., vests the Interstate Commerce Commission with exclusive
and plenary jurisdiction to examine, condition, and approve rail
carrier combinations, including the consolidation of two or more
carriers.  49 U.S.C. 11343(a)(1).  The statutory provisions grant the
Commission broad authority to evaluate the effects of these
transactions on interested persons and the public.  See 49 U.S.C.
11341-11351 (1982 & Supp. V 1987).

   Section 11344(c) provides that upon application of the parties, the
Commission may conduct a proceeding and "shall approve and authorize a
transaction under this section when it finds the transaction is
consistent with the public interest." 49 U.S.C. 11344(c).  That
Section identifies specific criteria to guide the Commission's
consideration, including "the interest of carrier employees affected
by the proposed transaction." 49 U.S.C. 11344(b)(1)(D).  /3/ Section
11344(c) also provides that the Commission "may impose conditions
governing the transaction." 49 U.S.C. 11344(c).

   Section 11347 provides that the Commission shall impose conditions
to protect the interests of railroad employees who are adversely
affected by an approved transaction.  49 U.S.C. 11347 (1982 & Supp. V
1987).  /4/ Pursuant to that authority, the Commission has formulated
standard labor-protective conditions, derived from the Commission's
decision in New York Dock Ry. -- Control -- Brooklyn Eastern Dist.
Terminal, 360 I.C.C. 60, 84-90, aff'd sub nom. New York Dock Ry. v.
United States, 609 F.2d 83 (2d Cir. 1979).  The New York Dock
conditions establish, among other things, procedures to resolve -- by
negotiation and, failing that, binding arbitration -- any labor
dispute arising from an ICC-approved railroad consolidation.
Accordingly, Section 4 of the New York Dock conditions, 360 I.C.C. at
85, requires a "railroad contemplating a transaction which . . . may
cause the dismissal or displacement of any employees, or rearrangement
of forces (to) give at least ninety . . . days written notice . . ."
Pet. App. 3a.  Section 2, 360 I.C.C. at 84, provides that "(t)he rates
of pay, rules, working conditions and all collective bargaining and
other rights, privileges and benefits . . . under applicable laws
and/or existing collective bargaining agreements or otherwise shall be
preserved unless changed by future collective bargaining agreements."
Pet. App. 3a-4a.  These conditions ensure that transactions found to
be in the public interest can be consummated without labor strife by
providing a "fair arrangement" (49 U.S.C. 11347 (Supp. V 1987)) for
displaced employees.  /5/

   When the Commission has approved a transaction, the statute exempts
the participants from legal obstacles that would otherwise bar or
impede its implementation.  Section 11341(a), the so-called immunity
provision, provides that upon ICC approval of a Section 11343
transaction:

      A carrier * * * participating in that approved * * * transaction
      is exempt from the antitrust laws and from all other law,
      including State and municipal law, as necessary to let that
      person carry out the transaction, hold, maintain, and operate
      property, and exercise control or franchises acquired through
      the transaction * * *.

   B. Proceedings Below

   1. No. 89-1027

   a. In March 1982, the ICC approved the application of NWS
Enterprises, Inc. (now Norfolk Southern, or NS), a holding company, to
acquire control of two rail carriers, petitioners Norfolk and Western
Railway Company (N & W) and Southern Railway Company (Southern).  See
Norfolk Southern Corp. -- Control -- Norfolk & W. Ry. and Southern
Ry., Finance No. 29430 (Sub-No. 1), 366 I.C.C. 173 (1982).  In its
order approving control, the ICC imposed the standard New York Dock
labor-protective conditions.  Pet. App. 6a.  Although the Commission
recognized that it was "possible that further displacement (of
employees) may arise as additional coordinations occur," it concluded
that "the minimum statutory protection of New York Dock is appropriate
for the protection of applicants' employees affected by this
proceeding." 366 I.C.C. at 230-231.

   Respondent American Train Dispatchers' Association (the
Association) was the bargaining representative of certain N & W
employees responsible for "power distribution" -- the process by which
locomotives are assigned to particular trains and facilities.  On
September 12, 1986, petitioners informed the Association that they
intended to consolidate all power distribution for the combined
Norfolk Southern operation by transferring the work performed at the N
& W power distribution center in Roanoke, Virginia, to the Southern
center in Atlanta, Georgia.  /6/ The carriers proposed that affected N
& W employees would be "given consideration" for employment in new
positions as superintendents in Atlanta.  Superintendents in Atlanta
were considered management, however, and were therefore not covered by
any collective bargaining agreement.  Pet. App. 6a-7a, 30a-31a.

   The Association thereafter sought to negotiate the terms under
which the proposed transfer would be implemented.  The negotiations
foundered, however, over the Association's contentions that (1) the
carriers' proposal involved a change in an existing collective
agreement and was subject to mandatory bargaining under the RLA;  (2)
the carriers were required to preserve the right of the transferred
employees to representation under the RLA;  and (3) the affected
employees were entitled to retain their rights, including their
seniority rights, under the collective bargaining agreement with N &
W.  The carriers then asked the National Mediation Board to appoint an
arbitrator pursuant to Section 4 of the New York Dock conditions.
Pet. App. 7a.

   The dispute thereafter came before a three-member arbitration
committee, which ruled in favor of the carriers on each of the
disputed issues.  See J.A. 8-32.  The committee first found that the
proposed consolidation was part of the control transaction approved by
the ICC. J.A. 15-16.  It noted that when the Commission approved the
underlying merger, the agency had expressly anticipated the
possibility of "additional coordinations" that would further "the goal
of greater efficiencies" J.A. 15.  The committee concluded that the
proposed transfer of work to Atlanta met that criterion.  J.A. 15-16.
/7/ Relying on prior ICC decisions (J.A. 17-19), the committee also
held that it had the authority to override -- to bar enforcement of --
any provision of a collective bargaining agreement or of the Railway
Labor Act that impeded implementation of the ICC-approved merger
between N & W and Southern.  Finally, the committee concluded that the
transferred employees could not retain their rights under the
collective bargaining agreement.  Pet. App. 7a.

   The carriers thereafter effected the coordination of work and
offered superintendent positions to all nine active and three
furloughed N & W employees.  Nine of the twelve accepted, two
declined, and one retired.  There were no displacements of other
employees.  Pet. App. 33a.

   b. The Commission affirmed by a divided vote.  Pet. App. 29a-46a.
It explained that "(i)t has long been the Commission's view that
private collective bargaining agreements and RLA provisions must give
way to the Commission-mandated procedures of section 4 (of the New
York Dock conditions) when parties are unable to agree on changes in
working conditions required to implement a transaction authorized by
the Commission." Id. at 33a.  Accordingly, the Commission stated, "the
panel correctly found * * * that * * * the compulsory, binding
arbitration required by Article I, section 4 of New York Dock, took
precedence over RLA procedures whether asserted independently or based
on existing collective bargaining agreements." Id. at 35a.

   The ICC also held that, because the proposed transfer was incident
to the merger approved by the Commission, it was "immunized from
conflicting laws by section 11341(a)." Pet. App. 35a.  /8/ The
Commission explained that "(t)o the extent that existing working
conditions and collective bargaining agreements conflict with a
transaction which (the ICC) ha(s) approved, those conditions and
agreements must give way to the implementation of the transaction."
Id. at 36a.  "Such a result is essential," the ICC noted, "if
transactions approved by (the agency) are not to be subjected to the
risk of non-consummation as a result of the inability of the parties
to agree on new collective bargaining agreements effecting changes in
working conditions necessary to implement those transactions." Id. at
34a.  Were the law otherwise, the Commission added, there would be "no
assurance that the approved transaction will ever be effected." Ibid.

   Finally, the Commission upheld as appropriate the decision to
override the collective bargaining agreement and the RLA provisions.
Reviewing the record, the Commission noted that "(i)mposition of the
collective bargaining agreement would jeopardize the transaction
because the work rules it mandates are inconsistent with the carriers'
underlying purpose of integrating the power distribution function."
/9/ Pet. App. 37a.  /10/

   2. No. 89-1028

   a. On September 23, 1980, the ICC approved a proposal under which
CSX Corporation would acquire control of two other holding companies:
(1) the Chessie System, Inc., whose principal railroad subsidiaries
were the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company and the Baltimore and
Ohio Railroad Company;  and (2) Seaboard Coast Line Industries, Inc.,
the parent of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad (later to become
petitioner, CSX Transportation, Inc.).  See CSX Corp. -- Control --
Chessie Sys., Inc., & Seaboard Coast Line Indust., Inc., Finance No.
28905 (Sub-No. 1), 363 I.C.C. 521 (1980).  As required by Section
11347 of the Act, the Commission imposed a standard set of labor
protective conditions, derived from New York Dock. Pet. App. 3a-4a;
89-1028 Pet. App. 54a.  The Commission recognized that "as the two
systems mesh their operations, additional coordinations may occur that
could lead to further employee displacements." 363 I.C.C. at 589.
Nevertheless, refusing to accede to the unions' request for more
favorable protections, the Commission determined that "the standard
conditions will adequately protect those employees now identified as
affected by the consolidation as well as those who may be affected in
the future, but are not now identified specifically." Ibid.

   At the time of the consolidation, Chessie operated a heavy freight
car repair shop in Raceland, Kentucky, and Seaboard operated a similar
shop in Waycross, Georgia.  On August 29, 1986, CSX, invoking Section
4 of the New York Dock conditions, notified the respondent labor
organizations that it intended to close the Waycross shop and to
transfer the employees and the work from that shop to the Raceland
shop.  The transfer was to result in a net decrease in available jobs
at the two shops.  Pet. App. 4a;  89-1028 Pet. App. 55a.

   Relations between CSX and the unions representing its employees
were governed at the time by a collective bargaining agreement known
as the "Orange Book," negotiated to implement a previously authorized
merger.  See 89-1028 Pet. App. 54a-55a.  The Orange Book provided,
among other things, that the carrier would employ each covered
employee for the remainder of his working life, and that no covered
employee "shall be deprived of employment or placed in a worse
position with respect to compensation, rules, working conditions,
fringe benefits or rights and privileges pertaining thereto at any
time during such employment." Pet. App. 4a.  In return for that job
protection, the Orange Book gave the carrier the right "to transfer
the work of the employees protected (t)hereunder throughout the merged
or consolidated (i.e., Seaboard) system * * *." Ibid.

   Once notified of the proposed transfer of work and employees,
respondent Brotherhood of Railway Carmen (the Brotherhood) attempted
to negotiate an implementation agreement on behalf of the affected
employees.  Negotiations foundered, however, due to disagreements
about (1) whether the displaced Waycross employees would retain their
Orange Book rights;  and (2) whether the proposed transfer would
result in a change of working conditions and, if so, whether CSX would
be required to comply with the Railway Labor Act before effecting such
a change.  CSX invoked arbitration under the New York Dock conditions,
and the matter came before a three-member arbitration panel.  Pet.
App. 4a-5a.

   The arbitration panel concluded that the Orange Book prohibited the
proposed transfer of work and employees.  89-1028 Pet. App. 82a-83a.
The panel stated, however, that as a "quasi-judicial extension of the
ICC" (id. at 80a), it had the authority to override any Orange Book or
RLA provision that impeded the transfer decision.  The panel then held
that (1) it would override the Orange Book prohibition on the transfer
of work, but not on the transfer of employees, and (2) it would exempt
CSX from the RLA insofar as the statute might require the carrier to
bargain before unilaterally changing the Orange Book with respect to
the transfer.  Pet. App. 5a-6a.  /11/

   b. By a divided vote, the Commission affirmed in part and reversed
in part.  89-1028 Pet. App. 33a-52a.  The Commission agreed that the
arbitrators were "empowered to override collective bargaining rights,
such as those in the Orange Book, and RLA rights in formulating the
implementing agreement." Id. at 43a.  But it rejected the panel's
refusal to permit the transfer of employees to Raceland.  The
Commission reasoned that if, as the panel had found, the Orange Book
prohibits such a transfer of employees, then to enforce the Orange
Book in this setting would "serve() as an impediment to implementation
of a transaction authorized by the Commission." Id. at 44a.  The
Commission also found that, in light of the positions available at
Raceland and the number of Waycross employees eligible for those
positions, "(i)mposition of an Orange Book employee exception would
effectively prevent implementation of the proposed transaction." Id.
at 45a.  /12/ The Commission accordingly reversed the arbitrators'
decision "to the extent it holds that CSX may not require transfer of
(Seaboard) employees as well as work from Waycross to Raceland." Id.
at 44a.  /13/

   3. The Court of Appeals' Decision

   The court of appeals considered the two cases together and reversed
and remanded.  Pet. App. 1a-26a.  The court held that Section 11341(a)
of the Act does not authorize the Commission to relieve a party to a
Section 11343 transaction of contractual obligations that impede
implementation of the transaction.  /14/ The court explained that the
statute does not expressly state that the ICC may override contracts,
"nor has it ever, in any of the various iterations since its initial
enactment in 1920, included even a general reference to 'contracts,'
much less any specific reference to (collective bargaining
agreements)." Pet. App. 12a.  The court stated that the Commission's
contrary view found "no support in the language of the statute,"
explaining that the phrase "all other law" in Section 11341(a) cannot
be read to include "all legal obstacles." Pet. App. 12a.

   The court also found no evidence in the legislative history to
support the Commission's construction of Section 11341(a).  Pet. App.
13a-19a.  Looking solely to the Transportation Act of 1920, ch 91,
Section 407, 41 Stat. 482, the court stated that Congress had "focused
nearly exclusively * * * on specific types of laws it intended to
eliminate -- all of which were positive enactments, not common law
rules of liability, as on a contract." Pet. App. 18a.  The court also
discerned in the legislative history "a healthy respect for privately
negotiated contracts." Ibid.  "And never, on the several occasions
when Congress has revisited the immunity provision, has it either
broadened that provision so as to reach 'all legal obstacles' to an
ICC-approved transaction, or acted more specifically to bring
'contracts' or 'collective bargaining agreements' within the reach of
the statute." Id. at 18a-19a.

   The court next "decline(d) to address the question" (Pet. App. 19a)
whether Section 11341(a) may operate to override provisions of the
RLA.  Observing that the Commission's present position with respect to
the RLA "depart(s) from its earlier precedent" (Pet. App. 23a), the
court directed the agency on remand either to "provide an explanation
for its new position on that issue, or adhere to its prior position."
Id. at 25a.  The court also explained that, "(i)n light of (its)
holding that Section 11341(a) does not empower the ICC to override a
(collective bargaining agreement), it is unclear what are the
consequences, if any, of its rulings that the carriers need not comply
with the RLA." Id. at 23a.  Because of the "uncertainty as to the
effects of (the) ruling on the continued vitality of the disputes,"
the court decided to remand the RLA issue to the Commission "to
determine whether there is any live RLA issue remaining." Id. at 25a.

   Finally, the court "decline(d) to address either the ICC's theory
that the labor protective conditions required by Section 11347 of the
Act are exclusive, or its related assertion * * * that Section 4 of
the New York Dock conditions gives the arbitration committee the
'absolute right' to effectuate the transfer of employees, and to
override any contrary provisions of a (collective bargaining
agreement)." Pet. App. 25a.  In the court's view, the Commission had
not raised those claims in its court of appeals' brief.  "In any
event," the court concluded (id. at 26a), it is "best for the ICC, if
it has not abandoned its Section 11347 and Section 4 rationales
altogether, to reconsider them in the first instance in light of" this
Court's intervening decision in Pittsburgh & Lake Erie R.R. v. Railway
Labor Executives' Ass'n, 109 S. Ct. 2584 (1989).

   4. Petitioners filed petitions for rehearing in the court of
appeals.  The Commission also filed a "limited" petition for
rehearing.  In it, the agency advised the court of its "intention to
reopen these proceedings and to promptly issue a comprehensive
decision on remand addressing issues (the agency) believe(s) the court
directed (it) to reconsider and those left open for resolution in
further proceedings." The Commission accordingly "requested that the
court refrain from ruling on (the agency's) petition for rehearing
until (the agency has) issued (its) decision on remand." CSX Corp. --
Control -- Chessie Sys., Inc. & Seaboard Coast Line Indus., Inc., ICC
Finance No. 28905 (Sub-No. 22) (Aug. 31, 1989) (hereafter, ICC Finance
No. 28905).

   By order served September 20, 1989, the Commission "reopen(ed)
the() proceedings so that (it) could address and explain in detail
(its) views on the issue specifically remanded;  i.e., whether the
provisions of 49 U.S.C. 11341(a) operate to override the provisions of
the Railway Labor Act (RLA), as well as on the general issues raised
in these proceedings, particularly the impact of our approval of a
transaction under 49 U.S.C. 11343 et seq. and imposition of our
standard labor conditions upon the parties' rights and remedies under
the RLA and with respect to existing collective bargaining
agreements." ICC Finance No. 28905.  The Commission added that "(i)n
light of the importance of the legal issues involved and (its)
intention to conduct a comprehensive examination of (its) authority
under 49 U.S.C. 11341, 11343, and 11347, etc., and the labor
conditions (it) ha(s) customarily imposed in approving railroad
consolidations," the agency was therefore "seeking further comment by
the parties to these proceedings as well as any other interested
parties." Ibid.

   On September 29, 1989, the court of appeals denied petitioners'
petitions for rehearing (Pet. App. 50a) and issued an order stating
that the Commission's petition would be "deferred pending release of
the ICC's decision on remand." Pet. App. 53a-54a.  Moreover, the court
amended its decision to remand only the "records," thus retaining
jurisdiction over the case.  Briefs by interested parties have now
been filed with the Commission, and the agency entertained oral
argument on January 4, 1990.

                          SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   The Interstate Commerce Act gives the Interstate Commerce
Commission broad authority to approve proposed railroad consolidations
that the Commission finds, after appropriate proceedings, to be
consistent with the public interest.  When such a transaction has been
approved, the ICA exempts each participating carrier from "all other
law, including State and municipal law, as necessary to let that
person carry out the transaction." 49 U.S.C. 11341(a).  Construing
Section 11341(a) in the present case, the Commission determined that
petitioners could proceed with their proposed transactions,
notwithstanding any conflicting obligations under collective
bargaining agreements executed with the private respondents.

   The court of appeals reversed, holding that the phrase "all other
law" in Section 11341(a) refers only to "positive enactments, not
common law rules of liability, as on a contract." Pet. App. 18a.  It
is that ruling, and only that ruling, that is before the Court at this
point, since all other questions remain for consideration by the
Commission and any later judicial review.

   With respect to that ruling -- involving the applicability of
Section 11341 to legal obligations under a collective bargaining
agreement -- the text, history, and purpose of Section 11341(a)
confirm the broader construction adopted by the Commission.  Since the
Commission is the agency charged with the enforcement of the ICA, its
reasonable interpretation of the statute should have been upheld.

   A. The text is dispositive.  Section 11341(a) exempts a covered
carrier from "all other law * * * as necessary to let that person
carry out the transaction." The exemption from "all other law" is
easily sufficient to embrace those laws governing the obligations of
parties to contracts in general, and to collective bargaining
agreements in particular.  Contracts are creatures of law, and they
are rendered enforceable through a regime of state and federal common
and statute law.  Indeed, this Court in Schwabacher v. United States,
334 U.S. 182 (1948), recognized that the "law" referred to in Section
11341 includes the law under which contractual obligations are
enforced.

   The contracts involved in this case -- collective bargaining
agreements in the railroad industry -- are enforceable under the
Railway Labor Act, 45 U.S.C. 151 et seq., which "(u)nquestionably * *
* is a federal law" within the meaning of Section 11341(a)
(Brotherhood of Locomotive Eng'rs v. Chicago & N.W. Ry., 314 F.2d 424,
432 (8th Cir.), cert. denied 375 U.S. 819 (1963)).  Thus the
longstanding and widespread recognition by the lower courts that
Section 11341(a) immunizes ICC-approved transactions from the
operation of the RLA where necessary to implement the transaction is
both correct and dispositive of the question presented here.

   B. The legislative history of Section 11341(a), and of the
consolidation provisions generally, confirms the meaning of the text.
Section 11341(a) derives from a provision contained in the
Transportation Act of 1920, which was intended to foster railroad
mergers generally, and which therefore broadly exempted carriers from
"all other restraints or prohibitions by law." Section 407, 41 Stat.
482.  What is more, on two occasions -- in 1933, and again in 1940 --
Congress expressly refused to narrow the scope of the ICC's
consolidation authority by carving out a special exception for
obligations arising from labor agreements.

   C. The court of appeals' conclusion -- according to which
collective bargaining agreements are fully enforceable under the RLA,
even when they are in conflict with the terms of an ICC-approved
consolidation -- cannot be squared with the evident purpose of the
consolidation provisions:  to foster the merger process while
accommodating, to the fullest extent possible, the competing claims of
affected employees.  If, as the court of appeals supposed, employees
may enforce conflicting contractual rights under the RLA, ICC-approved
transactions would "be subjected to the risk of non-consummation."
Pet. App. 34a.  By proposing a change in the existing collective
bargaining agreement, the transaction would thereby provoke a "major"
dispute under the RLA.  See Consolidated Rail Corp. v. Railway Labor
Executives' Ass'n, 109 S. Ct. 2477, 2480 (1989).  Where such a dispute
is involved, the parties must maintain the status quo while engaging
in a lengthy process of negotiation, mediation, and possibly review by
a Presidential Emergency Board.  Detroit & Toledo Shore Line R.R. v.
United Transp. Union, 396 U.S. 142 (1969).  If that process fails to
produce an agreement, each side is free to resort to strikes,
lock-outs, or other forms of economic self-help calculated to achieve
the desired objectives.  See 45 U.S.C. 152 Second and Seventh, 155
First, 156, 157, 160;  Burlington Northern R.R. v. Brotherhood of
Maintenance of Way Employees, 481 U.S. 429, 444-445 n.10 (1987).  And
"(s)ince there is no mechanism * * * for insuring that the parties
will arrive at agreement, there can be no assurance that the approved
transaction will ever be effected." Pet. App. 34a.  If applicable, the
procedures for modifying collective agreements under the RLA would
therefore "threaten to prevent many consolidations." Brotherhood of
Locomotive Eng'rs. v. Chicago & N.W. Ry., 314 F.2d at 431.

   D. "An agency's construction of a statute it is charged with
enforcing is entitled to deference if it is reasonable and not in
conflict with the expressed intent of Congress." United States v.
Riverside Bayview Homes, Inc., 474 U.S. 121, 131 (1985).  In light of
the text, history, and purpose of Section 11341(a), the Commission's
conclusion -- that "all other law" includes the law governing the
enforcement of collective bargaining agreements -- is entitled to
deference and should be upheld.

   The court of appeals acknowledged those principles (Pet. App. 11a),
but declined to defer to the Commission's construction of the statute.
 Yet even accepting the court's view (as we do not) -- that Congress
did not directly address the precise question at issue -- the court
should have asked only whether the Commission's construction of the
statute was "a reasonable one." Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 843-845 (1984).  In our
view, the Commission's judgment is plainly reasonable, and the court
of appeals erred in "substitut(ing) its own construction of a
statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation * * * of an
agency" (id. at 844).

                               ARGUMENT

   UNDER 49 U.S.C. 11341(a), A PARTY THAT HAS ENTERED INTO A MERGER
APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION IS EXEMPT FROM ANY LEGAL OBLIGATION IMPOSED
BY A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT, TO THE EXTENT SUCH AN EXEMPTION
IS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE MERGER

   The broad ruling of the court of appeals -- that the exemptions
provided by Section 11341(a) do not apply to those laws governing the
enforcement of contractual obligations -- raises only one important
but limited question for review.  If this Court determines, as we
believe it should, that this broad ruling was in error, the judgment
below should be reversed and the case remanded for consideration of
any remaining questions, including those that are now pending before
the Commission and that may be raised in subsequent proceedings for
judicial review.  /15/

   In reaching its conclusion, the court of appeals, in our view,
attempted to separate the inseparable -- holding that contracts are
not included among the laws referred to in Section 11341(a), but at
the same time "declin(ing) to address" the question whether Section
11341(a) may operate to override provisions of the RLA.  Pet. App.
19a.  Contracts derive their effectiveness and enforceability from a
regime of state and federal common and statute law, and the collective
bargaining agreements at issue here depend for their effectiveness and
enforceability on the RLA.  Just as this Court held in Schwabacher v.
United States, 334 U.S. 182 (1948), that contractural obligations
enforceable under state law are subject to the exemption conferred by
Section 11341(a), so the Court should hold in this case that
contractual obligations enforceable under the RLA are subject to the
same exemption.  This result, we submit, is compelled by the text and
history of Section 11341(a) and of related provisions.

   A. The Text of Section 11341(a) Makes Clear That Participants In An
ICC-approved Merger Are Exempt From All Legal Obstacles, Including
Obligations Under Collective Bargaining Agreements, That May
Jeopardize The Implementation of The Merger

   1. As this Court has explained many times, "the starting point for
interpreting a statute is the language of the statute itself.  Absent
a clearly expressed legislative intention to the contrary, that
language must ordinarily be regarded as conclusive." Consumer Prod.
Safety Comm'n v. GTE Sylvania, Inc., 447 U.S. 102, 108 (1980).  Accord
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 432 n.12 (1987);  Aaron v. SEC.,
446 U.S. 680 (1980);  Greyhound Corp. v. Mt. Hood Stages, Inc., 437
U.S. 322, 330 (1978).  The text of the ICA consolidation provisions,
and of Section 11341(a) in particular, leaves no doubt that
participants in an ICC-approved merger are exempt from obligations
under a collective bargaining agreement that may jeopardize the
implementation of the merger.

   The statutory language is both clear and straightforward.  Section
11344(c) provides that "(t)he Commission shall approve and authorize a
transaction under this section when it finds the transaction is
consistent with the public interest." 49 U.S.C. 11344(c).  Section
11341(a) provides (49 U.S.C. 11341(a)):

      A carrier, corporation, or person participating in that approved
      or exempted transaction is exempt from the antitrust laws and
      from all other law, including State and municipal law, as
      necessary to let that person carry out the transaction, hold,
      maintain, and operate property, and exercise control or
      franchises acquired through the transaction.

As the statutory language indicates, the Commission must determine
whether a proposed consolidation is consistent with the public
interest.  That determination is made on the record, after hearing the
views of interested persons.  See 49 U.S.C. 11344 (1982 & Supp. V
1987).  It is guided by specific statutory criteria (49 U.S.C.
11344(b)) -- including criteria requiring specific labor protections
(49 U.S.C. 11344(b)(1)(D)) -- and is, of course, subject to judicial
review (28 U.S.C. 2342).  But once the proposed transaction is
approved, Section 11341(a) confers an exemption from "all other law"
-- an exemption of sufficient breadth to permit the exempted party to
"carry out the transaction," notwithstanding any legal obstacle.

   The exemption from "all other law" is easily sufficient to embrace
those laws governing the enforceability of contracts in general, and
of collective bargaining agreements in particular.  Contracts are
voluntarily entered into, but depend for their effectiveness and
enforcement on a regime of state and federal common and statute law.
"The obligation of a contract," this Court has explained, "is the law
which binds the parties to perform their agreement." Hendrickson v.
Apperson, 245 U.S. 105, 112 (1917).  /16/ And the "(l)aws which
subsist at the time and place of the making of a contract, and where
it is to be performed, enter into and form part of it, as fully as if
they had been expressly referred to or incorporated in its terms" -- a
principle which "embraces alike those laws which affect its
construction and those which affect its enforcement and discharge."
Farmers & Merchants Bank v. Federal Reserve Bank, 262 U.S. 649, 660
(1923).  /17/

   Those principles apply with special force to collective bargaining
agreements.  "Federal law * * * create(s) the duty upon the parties to
bargain collectively;  Congress has provided for a system of federal
law applicable to the agreement the parties ma(k)e in response to that
duty * * *;  and federal law sets some outside limits * * * on what
their agreement may provide." Local 24, Int'l Brotherhood of Teamsters
v. Oliver, 358 U.S. 283, 296 (1959).  And collective bargaining
agreements in the railroad industry are uniquely "legal" instruments:
their formation, construction, and enforcement are regulated by a
detailed statutory framework -- the Railway Labor Act.

   For example, the Railway Labor Act requires the parties to "make
and maintain agreements" (45 U.S.C. 152 First) and to refrain from
making changes in existing agreements, except according to the
procedures established by the Act (45 U.S.C. 152 Seventh, 156).  The
Act "extends both to disputes concerning the making of collective
agreements and to grievances arising under existing agreements."
Slocum v. Delaware, L. & W. R.R., 339 U.S. 239, 242 (1950).  The Act
also "sets up machinery for conciliation, mediation, arbitration and
adjustment of disputes, to be invoked if negotiations fail." Ibid.
"(T)he federal statute is the source of the power and authority" of
collective bargaining agreements, and "(a) union agreement made
pursuant to the Railway Labor Act has, therefore, the imprimatur of
the federal law upon it." Railway Employees' Dep't v. Hanson, 351 U.S.
225, 232 (1956).  Accord California v. Taylor, 353 U.S. 553, 561
(1957).

   Thus, the law that renders collective bargaining agreements in the
railroad industry binding and enforceable, and that specifies the
procedures for changing such agreements, is, in essence, the RLA, an
Act that "(u)nquestionably * * * is a federal law" within the meaning
of Section 11341(a) (Brotherhood of Locomotive Eng'rs v. Chicago &
N.W. Ry., 314 F.2d 424, 432 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 375 U.S. 819
(1963)).  As the First Circuit recently noted, Section 11341(a)
"extends to any of the statutory provisions regulating railroads,
including the RLA." Brotherhood of Locomotive Eng'rs v. Boston & Maine
Corp., 788 F.2d 794, 800, cert. denied, 479 U.S. 829 (1986).  "(T)o
hold otherwise would be to disregard the plain language of (the
statute) conferring exclusive and plenary jurisdiction upon the ICC to
approve mergers and relieving the carrier from all other restraints of
federal law." Brotherhood of Locomotive Eng'rs v. Chicago & N.W. Ry.,
314 F.2d at 431-432.  Accord Missouri Pac. R.R. v. United Transp.
Union, 782 F.2d 107, 111-112 (8th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 482 U.S.
927 (1987);  Bundy v. Penn Cent. Co., 455 F.2d 277, 279 (6th Cir.
1972);  Nemitz v. Norfolk & W. Ry., 436 F.2d 841, 845 (6th Cir.),
aff'd without reaching the issue, 404 U.S. 37 (1971).  /18/

   In short, a contractual provision has legal force only by virtue of
law -- in this case, the RLA.  And the RLA, like any other law, is
within the scope of Section 11341(a).

   2. The court of appeals attempted to read Section 11341(a) more
narrowly.  "(D)eclin(ing) to address" the question whether Section
11341(a) applies to the RLA (Pet. App. 19a), the court sought to
abstract collective agreements from their federal statutory context,
and proceeded to exclude contracts generally from the scope of the
Section.  In the court's view, "all other law" refers only to
"positive enactments, not common law rules of liability" (Pet. App.
18a).  As a general proposition, that is surely mistaken;  "law" is
conventionally understood to include common law, as well as statutes.
See Erie R.R. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 79 (1938).  Relying on
scattered portions of legislative history, however, the court below
concluded that Congress had "focused nearly exclusively" on "specific
types of laws it intended to eliminate" -- all of which were statutes,
not common law.  Pet. App. 18a.  As we have already shown, that
inference could not sustain the result reached below, since the "law"
in point here is a federal statute (the RLA).  And as we show below,
the court of appeals misread the legislative history.  but in any
event, as this Court has recently explained, "(i)t is not the law that
a statute can have no effects which are not explicitly mentioned in
its legislative history." Pittston Coal Group v. Sebben, 109 S. Ct.
414, 420-421 (1988).  See also Regan v. Wald, 468 U.S. 222, 236-237
(1984);  Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschaft v. Federal Maritime Comm'n,
390 U.S. 261, 275 (1968).  Like the statute at issue in Pittston Coal,
Section 11341(a), with its reference to "all other law," "plainly
embraces criteria of more general application." 109 S. Ct. at 421 Cf.
McLean Trucking Co. v. United States, 321 U.S. 67, 79 (1944) (broad
language of predecessor of Section 11341(a) does "not admit of
nullification by reference to the varying conditions under which
different types of carriers were brought within the statute's
operation").

   The court of appeals also surmised that to accept the Commission's
construction of Section 11341(a) "would lead to most bizarre results."
Pet. App. 13a.  In particular, the court stated, "(u)nder the ICC's
reading, it could set to naught, in order to facilitate a merger, a
carrier's solemn undertaking, in a bond indenture or a bank loan, to
refrain from entering into any such transaction without the consent of
its creditors." Ibid.  But there is nothing "bizarre" about the
Commission's reading of the statute.  Indeed, that is precisely the
reading this Court gave the Act in Schwabacher v. United States, 334
U.S. 182 (1948).  In that case, the ICC had approved a merger of two
railroad companies, over the objection of certain preferred
stockholders of one of the companies.  Those stockholders claimed that
the terms of the merger deprived them of the full measure of their
rights to compensation under the corporate charter -- rights that were
theirs as owners of the preferred stock and that were recognized under
state law.  In reaching its determination, the Commission disclaimed
jurisdiction to resolve the shareholders' complaint, ruling that after
the merger was finally approved the dissenting claimants could file an
action in state court to assert their rights as stockholders.  This
Court rejected the Commission's approach.  Relying on the
consolidation provisions of the ICA (41 Stat. 482 -- including Section
5(11) (Transportation Act of 1940, ch. 722, Section 7, 54 Stat. 905,
908-909), the immediate precursor of Section 11341(a) (see p. 35,
infra) -- the Court held that the Commission "was given complete
control of the capital structure to result from a merger." 334 U.S. at
195.  Accordingly, the Court explained, before approving the merger
the Commission was required to consider the claims of the minority
shareholders.  Id. at 197-198.  But once the Commission had done so,
and had approved the final transaction as "just and reasonable" (id.
at 194), the dissenting shareholders were not entitled to attack that
decision collaterally, regardless of their rights under state law as
owners of the shares.  Id. at 201.  /19/

   B. The Legislative History Of Section 11341(a) Confirms That
ICC-approved Mergers Are Exempt From All Legal Obstacles, Including
Collective Bargaining Agreements, That May Jeopardize The
Implementation Of The Merger

   The legislative history of Section 11341(a), and of the
consolidation provisions generally, confirms the meaning of the text:
once approved by the ICC after a plenary public interest proceeding, a
merger is immunized from all legal obstacles -- including those posed
by obligations under collective bargaining agreements -- that threaten
the implementation of the approved transaction.  Indeed, Congress on
two occasions -- in 1933, and again in 1940 -- expressly refused to
narrow the scope of the ICC's consolidation authority by carving out a
special exception for obligations arising from labor agreements.

   1. The Transportation Act of 1920

   The language of the present Section 11341(a) finds its origin in
the Transportation Act of 1920, ch. 91, 41 Stat. 456.  See generally
St. Joe Paper Co. v. Atlantic Coast Line R.R., 347 U.S. 298, 315-321
(1954) (appendix to opinion of the Court).  Sections 407 and 408 of
the 1920 Act, 41 Stat. 480, 482, amended Section 5 of the Interstate
Commerce Act of 1887, ch. 104, 24 Stat. 380, specifically to encourage
railroad consolidation.  See St. Joe Paper Co. v. Atlantic Coast Line
R.R., 347 U.S. at 315-316.  Following a period of governmental
ownership during World War I, "many of the railroads were in very weak
condition and their continued survival was in jeopardy." Id. at 315.
The 1920 Act therefore directed the Commission, "as soon as
practicable," to "prepare and adopt a plan for the consolidation of
the railway properties of the continental United States into a limited
number of systems." Section 407, 41 Stat. 481 (Section 5(4)).  "As a
result of the enactment of the Transportation Act of 1920,
consolidation of the railroads of the country, in the interest of
economy and efficiency, became an established national policy * * * so
intimately related to the maintenance of an adequate and efficient
rail transportation system that the 'public interest' in the one
cannot be dissociated from that in the other." United States v.
Lowden, 308 U.S. 225, 232 (1939).

   To facilitate the consolidation process, the 1920 Act added Section
5(8), exempting participants in Commission-approved consolidations
from federal and state legal obstacles.  41 Stat. 482.  Section 5(8)
stated (41 Stat. 482 (emphasis added)):

         The carriers affected by any order made under the foregoing
      provisions of this section * * * shall be, and they are hereby,
      relieved from the operation of the "antitrust laws," * * * and
      of all other restraints or prohibitions by law, State or
      Federal, in so far as may be necessary to enable them to do
      anything authorized or required by any order made under and
      pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section.

Consistent with the overall purpose to effectuate consolidation, this
broad statutory language targeted all legal "restraints or
prohibitions" that might otherwise impede the covered carrier from
accomplishing "anything authorized" by the Commission pursuant to the
consolidation provisions.

   2. The Emergency Railroad Transportation Act of 1933

   In the years following the enactment of the 1920 Act, there was a
continuing decline in railway revenues and traffic.  L. Lecht,
Experience Under Railway Labor Legislation 105 (1955).  Many railroads
went bankrupt, while others borrowed large sums of money from the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation to fund continuing operations.  S.
Rep. No. 87, 73d Cong., 1st Sess. 1 (1933).  To meet the resulting
interest charges, many railroads deferred maintenance.  H.R. Rep. No.
193, 73d Cong., 1st Sess. 9 (1933).  Railroad employment dropped from
1,750,000 to 1,000,000.  Ibid.  Responding to the crisis, Congress
enacted the Emergency Railroad Transportation Act of 1933 (ERTA), ch.
91, 48 Stat. 211.

   Title I of ERTA was temporary legislation -- ultimately of three
years duration /20/ -- that was intended to help the railroads become
financially stable.  See S. Rep. No. 87, supra, at 1.  It established
"emergency powers to be exercised through a railroad coordinator,"
whose task was "to compel the elimination of unnecessary expenses and
the duplication of services and other economy measures" in order "to
stabilize the value of railroad securities and make unnecessary a
continued drain on Reconstruction Finance Corporation funds." Id. at
1-2.  The coordinator did not however, have explicit authority to
compel consolidations.  See 77 Cong. Rec. 4859 (1933) (Rep. Rayburn)
("The coordinator has nothing whatever to do with consolidations.  * *
* (T)he question of consolidation * * * is left where it has been
since 1920, with the Interstate Commerce Commission and not with any
coordinator").  See also St. Joe Paper Co. v. Atlantic Coast Line
R.R., 347 U.S. 298, 317 (1954).

   Section 10(a) of Title I of ERTA (48 Stat. 215) contained an
immunity provision with language that generally paralleled Section
5(8) of the Transportation Act of 1920 (41 Stat. 482), the earliest
precursor of Section 11341(a).  Significantly, however, in response to
concerns raised by labor representatives, Congress added an explicit
exception from Section 10(a) for the requirements of the RLA and for
duties and obligations under collective bargaining agreements entered
into pursuant to that Act.  Section 10(a) therefore provided in
pertinent part (48 Stat. 215):

         The carriers or subsidiaries subject to the Interstate
      Commerce Act, as amended, affected by any order of the
      Coordinator or Commission made pursuant to this title shall, so
      long as such order is in effect, be, and they are hereby,
      relieved from the operation of the antitrust laws, * * * and of
      all other restraints or prohibitions by law, State or Federal,
      other than such as are for the protection of the public health
      or safety, in so far as may be necessary to enable them to do
      anything authorized or required by such order made pursuant to
      this title:  Provided, however, That nothing herein shall be
      construed to repeal, amend, suspend, or modify any of the
      requirements of the Railway Labor Act or the duties and
      obligations imposed thereunder or through contracts entered into
      in accordance with the provisions of said Act.  /21/

   At the same time, in Title II of ERTA -- which, unlike Title I, was
permanent legislation, see S. Rep. No. 87, supra, at I -- Congress
amended the consolidation provisions of the Interstate Commerce Act,
principally to "give the Commission control over holding companies
that acquire stocks of railroads, and thereby effect consolidations
without approval of the commission." Ibid.  In Section 202(15) of
Title II, Congress reenacted the immunity provision -- Section 5(8) of
the 1920 Act -- adding somewhat broader language in the process.  See
48 Stat. 219.  Congress did not, however, carve out an exception for
the Railway Labor Act or for obligations under agreements made
pursuant to that statute.  Section 202(15) provided in pertinent part
(48 Stat. 219):

         The carriers and any corporations affected by any order made
      under the foregoing provisions of this section shall be, and
      they are hereby, relieved from the operation of the antitrust
      laws * * * and of all other restraints or prohibitions by or
      imposed under authority of law, State or Federal, insofar as may
      be necessary to enable them to do anything authorized or
      required by such order.

   The striking difference between Title I of ERTA (temporary
legislation, containing an explicit exception for collective
bargaining agreements) and Title II of the statute (a precursor of
Section 11341(a), containing no exception for collective bargaining
agreements) cannot be considered accidental.  "(W)here Congress
includes particular language in one section of a statute but omits it
in another section of the same Act, it is generally presumed that
Congress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion
or exclusion." Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23 (1983).
/22/ Indeed, this Court made that very point in connection with a
related provision of ERTA.  In Texas v. United States, 292 U.S. 522
(1934), the ICC had approved a control transaction, over a State's
objection that the terms of the transaction would improperly permit
the parties to relinquish certain offices within the State.  In this
Court, the State contended that the transaction violated Section 11 of
Title I of ERTA, which withheld from carriers the authority to abandon
offices and shops.  48 Stat. 215.  The Court rejected that contention.
 Section 11, the Court explained, was contained in Title I, which
dealt only with the "'emergency powers' * * * of the Federal
Coordinator of Transportation and kindred matters." 292 U.S. at 533.
As such, the Court added, Section 11 did "not by its terms apply to
the provisions of Title II of the Act, in which are found the
amendments of Section 5 of the Interstate Commerce Act with respect to
the approval and authorization by the Interstate Commerce Commission
of consolidations, purchases and leases." 292 U.S. at 533.  "The
insertion of the provision in Title I, * * * and the omission of a
similar provision from Title II, indicate an intentional distinction."
Id. at 534.

   So, too, with respect to the exception for collective bargaining
agreements:  in structuring Titles I and II as it did, Congress
"demonstrated that it knew how to provide (for an exception for
collective bargaining agreements) when it wished to do so elsewhere in
the very 'legislation cited.'" Lehman v. Nakshian, 453 U.S. 156, 162
(1981).  "Under traditional principles of statutory construction," the
difference between the two sections must therefore be seen as
intentional.  Fedorenko v. United States, 449 U.S. 490, 512 (1981).
See Lawrence County v. Lead-Deadwood School Dist. No. 40-1, 469 U.S.
256, 267 (1985);  United States v. Erika, Inc., 456 U.S. 201, 208
(1982).

   3. The Transportation Act of 1940

   Section 7 of the Transportation Act of 1940, ch. 722, 54 Stat. 905,
amended and recodified Section 5 of the ICA but left the provisions
relevant here substantially intact.  In particular, Section 5(8) of
the 1920 Act, as amended, was subsumed within revised Section 5(11)
(54 Stat. 908-909), and remained essentially unchanged.  Section 5(11)
provided in pertinent part (54 Stat. 908-909):

      any carriers or other corporations, and their officers and
      employees and any other persons, participating in a transaction
      approved or authorized under the provisions of this section
      shall be and they are hereby relieved from the operation of the
      antitrust laws and of all other restraints, limitations, and
      prohibitions of law, Federal, State, or municipal, insofar as
      may be necessary to enable them to carry into effect the
      transaction so approved or provided for in accordance with the
      terms and conditions, if any, imposed by the Commission * * *.

When Congress recodified this language in the present Section 11341(a)
of the ICA, it effected no substantive change.  Act of Oct. 17, 1978,
Pub. L. No. 95-473, Section 3(a), 92 Stat. 1466;  Trailer Marine
Transp. Corp. v. FMC, 602 F.2d 379, 383 n.18 (D.C. Cir. 1979).  See
H.R. Rep. No. 1395, 95th Cong., 2d Sess. 158-160 (1978).  See also ICC
v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Eng'rs, 482 U.S. 270, 299 n.12 (1987)
(Stevens, J., concurring in the judgment).

   During the legislative process culminating in the 1940 Act, there
was "a widespread awareness in the railroad industry that many of the
economies to be gained from consolidations or abandonments could be
realized only at the expense of displaced railroad labor." Railway
Labor Executives' Ass'n v. United States, 339 U.S. 142, 147 (1950).
Reflecting that concern, Congress enacted, in Section 5(2)(f) of the
Act, 54 Stat. 906-907, a labor protective provision for employees
affected by ICC-approved consolidations.  /23/

   Prior to the enactment of Section 5(2)(f), however, Representative
Harrington offered an amendment to the provision, designed to protect
affected employees against any displacement or other interference with
contractual rights:

      Provided, however, That no such transaction shall be approved by
      the Commission if such transaction will result in unemployment
      or displacement of employees of the carrier or carriers, or in
      the impairment of existing employment rights of said employees.

84 Cong. Rec. 9882 (1939).  The proposed amendment posed a significant
obstacle to the prospects of future consolidations.  As this Court
observed in Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n v. United States, 339 U.S.
at 151, until the Harrington Amendment was offered, "there had been
substantial agreement on the need for consolidations, together with a
recognition that employees could and should be fairly and equitably
protected.  This amendment, however, threatened to prevent all
consolidations to which it related."

   Not surprisingly, therefore, the Harrington Amendment encountered
intense opposition.  In a January 29, 1940 letter to the Chairman of
the Senate and House Committees on Interstate Commerce, the Interstate
Commerce Commission stated:

      As for the (Harrington Amendment), the object of unifications is
      to save expense, usually by the saving of labor.  * * * The
      proviso, by prohibiting any displacement of employees, goes much
      too far, and in the long run will do more harm than good to the
      employees.  In these days of intense competition from other
      forms of transportation, the railroads must, if they are to
      thrive and grow, conduct their operations with the utmost
      possible economy and efficiency.  If they are prevented from
      doing this, further shrinkage of operations and continuing loss
      of employment are inevitable.

Staff of House Legislative Comm. On Interstate Commerce Commission,
76th Cong., 3d Sess., Omnibus Transportation Legislation 67 (House
Comm. Print 1940).  After a lengthy conference, on April 26, 1940, the
conferees agreed on a bill that followed the form of the House
Amendment but did not contain the Harrington Amendment.  See H.R.
Conf. Rep. No. 2016, 76th Cong., 3d Sess. 16 (1940);  86 Cong. Rec.
5879-5880 (1940).  The House voted to recommit the bill with
instructions to its conferees to insist on a modified version of the
Harrington Amendment.  86 Cong. Rec. 5886 (1940).  After further
consideration, the conferees then reported out the bill a second time
without the Harrington Amendment.  That bill became the Transportation
Act of 1940.  /24/

   The defeat of the Harrington Amendment confirms Congress's intent
to allow carriers to implement ICC-approved consolidations --
notwithstanding the "impairment of existing employment rights of * * *
employees" -- as long as those employees are compensated and otherwise
fairly protected under the Commission's labor protective conditions.
Accord Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees v. United States,
366 U.S. 169 (1961).  The court of appeals' decision in the present
case overlooks the point, construing Section 11341(a) as if the
Harrington Amendment had become law and indeed had been rewritten to
extend to all contractual obligations.  But the amendment was
rejected;  and "(f)ew principles of statutory construction are more
compelling than the proposition that Congress does not intend sub
silentio to enact statutory language that it has earlier discarded in
favor of other language." INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421,
442-443 (1987).  See generally Fox v. Standard Oil Co., 294 U.S. 87,
96 (1935).

   C. The Court of Appeals' Decision Cannot Be Squared With The
Purpose Of The ICA Consolidation Provisions

   The scope of Section 11341(a) must also be "measured by the purpose
which Congress had in view" -- in this case, "the promotion of economy
and efficiency in interstate transportation by the removal of the
burdens of excessive expenditure" (Texas v. United States, 292 U.S.
522, 534-535 (1934)).  The court of appeals' conclusion -- according
to which collective bargaining agreements are fully enforceable even
when they are in conflict with the terms of an ICC-approved
consolidation -- cannot be squared with that evident purpose.

   The consolidation provisions foster the merger process, while at
the same time accommodating, to the fullest extent possible, the
competing claims of employees and other persons who may be adversely
affected by the proposed transaction.  The statute accomplishes that
goal by providing interested parties -- including labor unins --
extensive opportunities to participate in the Commission's
consolidation review proceedings and to voice their objections during
the "public interest" inquiry.  Parties may object, in whole or in
part, to approval of a transaction, on the ground that such approval
will undermine the policies expressed in other federal statutes.  The
Commission must take account of these objections, in determining
whether the merger is "consistent with the public interest." 49 U.S.C.
11344(c).  See, e.g., McLean Trucking Co. v. United States, 321 U.S.
67, 79-80 (1944) (antitrust objections to motor carrier
consolidation).

   The consolidation provisions are particularly solicitous of
employees who may be adversely affected by a transaction.  Recognizing
that consolidations necessarily "result in wholesale dismissals and
extensive transfers, involving expense to transferred employees," as
well as "the loss of seniority rights" (United States v. Lowden, 308
U.S. 225, 233 (1939)), the statute imposes a variety of labor
protective requirements.  Before it may give its approval, the
Commission must consider "the interest of carrier employees affected
by the proposed transaction." 49 U.S.C. 11344(b)(1)(D).  Moreover, as
part of any approved transaction, the Commission must impose certain
"employee protective arrangements," including a guarantee generally
ensuring that "the employees of the affected rail carrier will not be
in a worse position related to their employment as a result of the
transaction during the 4 years following the effective date of the
final action of the Commission." 49 U.S.C. 11347 (Supp V 1987).  And
pursuant to Section 11347, the Commission has traditionally imposed
the so-called New York Dock conditions, which generally entitle an
affected employee to receive, for a period of years, the equivalent of
the wages he received prior to displacement.  See New York Dock Ry. --
Control -- Brooklyn Eastern Dist. Terminal, 360 I.C.C. 60, 84-90,
aff'd sub nom. New York Dock Ry. v. United States, 609 F.2d 83 (2d
Cir. 1979).

   In this manner, the consolidation provisions ensure that all
affected parties have a voice in the approval process, and are
accommodated as fully as possible in the approved transaction.  At the
same time, Section 11341(a) ensures that once the approval has been
granted, an exemption from "all other law" takes immediate effect.
The statute does not permit employees, who have already received the
protections afforded by Section 11347, to impede implementation of the
merger by insisting on conflicting collective bargaining rights under
the RLA.

   Were resort to the RLA necessary, approved transactions would "be
subjected to the risk of non-consummation" (Pet. App. 34a).  By
proposing a change in the existing collective bargaining agreement,
the transaction would thereby provoke a "major" dispute under the RLA.
 See Consolidated Rail Corp. v. Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n, 109
S. Ct. 2477, 2480 (1989);  Elgin, J. & E. Ry. v. Burley, 325 U.S. 711,
723 (1945), aff'd on reh'g, 327 U.S. 661 (1946).  In any such dispute,
the parties must maintain the status quo while engaging in a lengthy
process of negotiation, mediation, and possibly review by a
Presidential Emergency Board.  Detroit & Toledo Shore Line R.R. v.
United Transp. Union, 396 U.S. 142 (1969).  If that process fails to
produce an agreement, each side is free to resort to strikes,
lock-outs, or other forms of economic self-help calculated to achieve
the desired objectives.  See 45 U.S.C. 152 Second and Seventh, 155
First, 156, 157, 160;  Burlington Northern R.R. v. Brotherhood of
Maintenance of Way Employees, 481 U.S. 429, 444-445 n.10 (1987);
Brotherhood of R.R. Trainmen v. Jacksonville Terminal Co., 394 U.S.
369, 378 (1969).

   Although that "virtually endless" process may well be suited to
prevent the kind of "labor unrest" that gave rise to the RLA
(Burlington Northern R.R. v. Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way
Employees, 481 U.S. at 444), it poses severe difficulties for approved
consolidations.  "(U)nder the Railway Labor Act provisions, it is
possible for either party to completely block any change in working
conditions by refusing to agree to a change and by refusing to
arbitrate." Brotherhood of Locomotive Eng'rs v. Chicago & N.W. Ry.,
314 F.2d at 431.  As the Commission has noted, "(s)ince there is no
mechanism * * * for insuring that the parties will arrive at
agreement, there can be no assurance that the approved transaction
will ever be effected." Pet. App. 34a.  If applicable, the RLA would
therefore "threaten to prevent many consolidations." Brotherhood of
Locomotive Eng'rs v. Chicago & N.W. Ry., 314 F.2d at 431.  Such an
outcome cannot be squared with the evident purpose of the
consolidation provisions, and Section 11341(a) in particular:  to
provide an exemption "as necessary to let (the participant) carry out
the transaction" (49 U.S.C. 11341(a)).

   D. The Court Of Appeals Erroneously Declined To Defer To The
Commission's Construction Of Section 11341(a)

   This Court has "long recognized that considerable weight should be
accorded to an executive department's construction of a statutory
scheme it is entrusted to administer." Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 844 (1984).  "An
agency's construction of a statute it is charged with enforcing is
entitled to deference if it is reasonable and not in conflict with the
expressed intent of Congress." United States v. Riverside Bayview
Homes, Inc., 474 U.S. 121, 131 (1985).  In light of the text, history,
and purpose of Section 11341(a), the Commission's conclusion -- that
the Section applies to legal obligations under collective bargaining
agreements -- is entitled to deference and should be upheld.

   The court of appeals acknowledged those principles (Pet. App. 11a),
but declined to defer to the Commission's construction of the statute.
 The court observed that deference is appropriate only when a court
determines, "based upon the language of the statute and the
'traditional tools of statutory construction,' * * * that Congress has
not 'directly spoken to the precise question at issue'" (ibid.).  The
court therefore elected to "strike out * * * in search of Congress's
intent in enacting the immunity provision of the Act." Id. at 11a-12a.

   The results of the court's "search" did not justify the panel's
refusal to defer to the Commission.  After canvassing the text and
history of the statute, all the court could determine -- on its view
of the case -- was (1) that Section 11341(a) does not expressly refer
to "contracts" (Pet. App. 12a);  (2) that Section 11341(a) was
intended principally to protect against "unfriendly state commissions
and legislatures" (Pet. App. 15a) and "recently invigorated antitrust
laws of the federal Government" (id. at 16a);  (3) that in enacting
Section 11341(a) Congress had "focused nearly exclusively" on
"positive enactments, not common law rules of liability" (Pet. App.
18a);  and (4) that in the legislative debates on the 1920 Act,
Congress had "exhibited a healthy respect for privately negotiated
contracts" (ibid.).

   Even under the court of appeals' view (which we vigorously
dispute), that evidence does not justify a refusal to defer to the
Commission.  Assuming that Congress did not directly address the
precise question at issue, the question before the court was whether
the Commission's construction of the statute "in the context of this
particular program is a reasonable one." Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 467 U.S.
at 843-845.  Here, the Commission's judgment is plainly reasonable.
Thus, even were the case a close one on the merits -- and we do not
think it is -- the court of appeals erred in "substitut(ing) its own
construction of a statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation
* * * of an agency" (Chevron U.S.A. Inc. 467 U.S. at 844).

                              CONCLUSION

   The judgment of the court of appeals should be reversed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   JOHN G. ROBERTS, JR.

      Acting Solicitor General /25/

   DAVID L. SHAPIRO

      Deputy Solicitor General

   LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   ROBERT S. BURK

      General Counsel

   HENRI F. RUSH

      Deputy General Counsel

   JOHN J. MCCARTHY, JR.

      Deputy Associate General Counsel Interstate Commerce Commission

   MAY 1990

   /1/ References to "Pet. App." are to the appendix to the petition
in No. 89-1027.

   /2/ Under the Hobbs Administrative Orders Review Act, 28 U.S.C.
2341 et seq., this Court is authorized to review, on a writ of
certiorari as provided by 28 U.S.C. 1254(1), "a final judgment of the
court of appeals." 28 U.S.C. 2350.  Although the court of appeals
remanded this case to the Commission for further proceedings, we
believe its decision is nonetheless "final" for purposes of Section
2350, and is therefore reviewable by this Court.  We have explained
our views on this point at greater length in our opening brief (at
29-30) and reply brief (at 13 & n.10) in Sullivan v. Finkelstein, No.
89-504, copies of which have been furnished to all counsel.

   /3/ Section 11344(b)(1) instructs that in situations, as here,
involving the merger or control of at least two class I railroads, the
Commission shall consider "at least" the following factors (49 U.S.C.
11344(b)(1)):

         (A) the effect of the proposed transaction on the adequacy of
      transportation to the public.

         (B) the effect on the public interest of including, or
      failing to include, other rail carriers in the area involved in
      the proposed transaction.

         (C) the total fixed charges that result from the proposed
      transaction.

         (D) the interest of carrier employees affected by the
      proposed transaction.

         (E) whether the proposed transaction would have an adverse
      effect on competition among rail carriers in the affected
      region.

   /4/ Among other things, Section 11347 states that "(t)he
arrangement and the order approving the transaction must require that
the employees of the affected rail carrier will not be in a worse
position related to their employment as a result of the transaction
during the 4 years following the effective date of the final action of
the Commission (or if an employee was employed for a lesser period of
time by the carrier before the action became effective, for that
lesser period)." 49 U.S.C. 11347 (1982 & Supp. V 1987).

   /5/ The conditions devised by the Commission under Section 11347
for approved transactions stand in sharp contrast to the RLA's
cumbersome procedures for changing the provisions of a collective
agreement.  Under the RLA, an attempt to change a collective agreement
results in a "major dispute." Elgin, J. & E. Ry. v. Burley, 325 U.S.
711, 723 (1945), aff'd on reh'g, 327 U.S. 661 (1946).  The parties
must engage in a protracted procedure to resolve their differences,
which includes negotiation, mediation, and conciliation, and must
consider voluntary arbitration.  See 45 U.S.C. 156, 157.  If the
parties are unable to reach an agreement, either party may resort to
economic self-help such as a lock-out or strike.  See generally
Brotherhood of R.R. Trainmen v. Jacksonville Terminal Co., 394 U.S.
369, 378-380 (1969).

   /6/ Petitioners asserted that as a result of the proposed
consolidation, "power distribution functions would be aligned along *
* * (a) more efficient east-west division of the combined system,"
thus permitting "substantial cost savings because fewer locomotives
will be needed and the remaining locomotives can be used more
efficiently." Pet. App. 31a-32a.

   /7/ In particular, the committee observed that during the hearing
it had received testimony indicating "that there will be substantial
saving to the combined carrier through the planned coordination, both
in capital costs since fewer locomotives will be needed and also since
operating costs of the remaining locomotives may be reduced through
their more efficient utilization throughout the entire system." J.A.
16.  See also J.A. 10 (testimony of J.R. Martin, Senior Vice
President, Transportation Planning, Southern Railway Company).

   /8/ The Commission noted that although "(t)he proposed transfer"
was "not specifically mentioned in Norfolk Southern Control," it was
nonetheless "one of the future coordinations and public benefits
expected to flow from, and is therefore part of, the control
transaction that (the Commission) approved.  Indeed, the arbitration
panel found that coordination of locomotive power is precisely the
type of action that might reasonably be expected to flow from the
control transaction." Pet. App. 35a.

   /9/ In denying the Association's earlier application to stay the
Committee's arbitration award, the Commission had also noted that "the
record shows that N & W and Southern will realize a $26 million
capital investment saving and an annual $2 million operating expense
saving, exclusive of labor cost savings, from the coordination." J.A.
37.

   /10/ Commissioner Lamboley dissented.  Pet. App. 42a-46a.  In his
view, the case should have been remanded to the arbitration panel for
a determination of whether, and to what extent, the provisions of the
collective bargaining agreement could have been accommodated,
consistent with the goal of completing the approved transfer.

   /11/ The arbitrators also found that although the proposed
consolidation of freight car repair facilities "was not expressly and
specifically presented to the Commission during administrative
proceedings culminating in approval of the control application," the
transaction was nevertheless an "action taken pursuant to
authorizations of th(e) Commission," within the meaning of New York
Dock.  89-1028 Pet. App. 78a.

   /12/ In particular, the Commission noted that CSX "propose(d) to
establish a total of 107 positions at Raceland, including 86 carmen
positions.  Of the 86 Waycross carmen who are eligible for those
positions, 57 are entitled to Orange Book protection." If the
arbitrators' decision prevailed, the Commission observed, "those 57
Waycross employees (over 55 percent of the proposed Raceland work
force) (could) refuse to accept positions at Raceland." 89-1028 Pet.
App. 44a-45a.

   /13/ Commissioner Lamboley dissented.  89-1028 Pet. App. 46a-52a.
He expressed "substantial doubt" that the proposed transfer of work
and employees was a transaction authorized by the Commission's prior
approval of the control by CSX of Chessie and Seaboard.  Id. at 46a.
He also rejected the proposition that "any conflict, regardless of
origin or degree, is an impediment pre-empted by (Interstate Commerce
Act) provisions." Id. at 49a.

   /14/ The court of appeals acknowledged that the rule of deference
articulated in Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), "applies to the ICC's reading of
the statute that it is charged with implementing." Pet. App. 11a.  The
court stated, however, that deference may be afforded only where a
court determines, "based upon the language of the statute and the
'traditional tools of statutory construction,' * * * that Congress has
not 'directly spoken to the precise question at issue.'" Ibid.

   /15/ These questions may include whether the overriding of
contractual obligations was "necessary" to the implementation of the
transaction within the meaning of Section 11341(a), and whether and to
what extent the Commission's decision was authorized by the labor
protective conditions associated with Section 11347.

   /16/ Accord Louisiana v. New Orleans, 102 U.S. 203, 206 (1880);
Walker v. Whitehead, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 314, 318 (1873);  Von Hoffman
v. City of Quincy, 71 U.S. (4 Wall.) 535, 552 (1867).

   /17/ Accord Hendrickson, 245 U.S. at 112;  Walker, 83 U.S. (16
Wall.) at 317;  Von Hoffman, 71 U.S. (4 Wall.) at 550;  Ogden v.
Saunders, 25 U.S. (12 Wheat.) 212, 231 (1827).

   /18/ See also Texas & N. O. R.R. v. Brotherhood of R.R. Trainmen,
307 F.2d 151, 158-162 (5th Cir. 1962) (holding that the predecessor to
Section 11341(a) does not preempt the Norris-LaGuardia Act, 29 U.S.C.
101 et seq., or a prior collective bargaining agreement, but
recognizing that under the predecessor provision the Commission has
jurisdiction "to find whether certain of the union (contractual)
demands are contrary to the public interest in the effectuation of the
transaction" and "thereafter to prevent the enforcement" of those
demands), cert. denied, 371 U.S. 952 (1963).  Cf. Burlington Northern,
Inc. v. American Ry. Supervisors Ass'n, 503 F.2d 58, 62-63 (7th Cir.
1974) (labor-protective conditions imposed as part of ICC approval of
a consolidation override conflicting provisions of the RLA), cert.
denied, 421 U.S. 975 (1975).

   /19/ There is, of course, no question that the state law rights of
the dissenting shareholders -- rights superseded by Section 11341(a)
-- were contractual in nature, since they arose out of the corporate
charter and the terms under which the preferred stock was offered for
sale.

   In Texas & N.O. R.R. v. Brotherhood of R.R. Trainmen, supra, the
Fifth Circuit, relying on Schwabacher, recognized the Commission's
jurisdiction to "prevent the enforcement" of union contractual demands
found to jeopardize effectuation of an approved transaction.  307 F.2d
at 161-162.

   /20/ Originally enacted for one year, Title I was extended for an
additional year by Presidential proclamation, Proclamation No. 2081,
48 Stat. 1740 (1934), and then for a third year, until June 17, 1936,
by Congress.  S.J. Res. 112, 74th Cong., 1st Sess.; 79 Cong. Rec. 9346
(1935).

   /21/ Title I also contained an additional labor protection,
ensuring that, allowing for normal attrition, no action taken by the
Coordinator could reduce the number of railroad employees below the
number in service during May 1933, and providing further that no
employee then in service shall "be deprived of employment such as he
had during said month of May or be in a worse position with respect to
his compensation for such employment, by reason of any action taken
pursuant to the authority conferred by this title." Section 7(b), 48
Stat. 214.

   /22/ Accord INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 432 (1987).  See
also Kissinger v. Reporters Comm. for Freedom of the press, 445 U.S.
136, 148-149 (1980);  Transamerica Mortgage Advisors, Inc. v. Lewis,
444 U.S. 11, 19-20 (1979).

   /23/ Section 5(2)(f) provided as follows (54 Stat. 906-907):

         As a condition of its approval, under this paragraph (2), of
      any transaction involving a carrier or carriers by railroad
      subject to the provisions of this part, the Commission shall
      require a fair and equitable arrangement to protect the
      interests of the railroad employees affected.  In its order of
      approval the Commission shall include terms and conditions
      providing that during the period of four years from the
      effective date of such order such transaction will not result in
      employees of the carrier or carriers by railroad affected by
      such order being in a worse position with respect to their
      employment, except that the protection afforded to any employee
      pursuant to this sentence shall not be required to continue for
      a longer period, following the effective date of such order,
      than the period during which such employee was in the employ of
      such carrier or carriers prior to the effective date of such
      order.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, an
      agreement pertaining to the protection of the interests of said
      employees may hereafter be entered into by any carrier or
      carriers by railroad and the duly authorized representative or
      representatives of its or their employees.

Transportation Act of 1940, ch. 722, Section 7, 54 Stat. 906-907
(Section 5(2)(f)).

   The current version of this provision is 49 U.S.C. 11347 (Supp. V
1987).  See p. 40, infra.

   /24/ The bill was passed by the House on August 12, 1940, 86 Cong.
Rec. 10,194, and by the Senate on September 9, 1940, 86 Cong. Rec.
11,766.  It was signed by the President on September 18, 1940, 86
Cong. Rec. 12,290.

   /25/ The Solicitor General is disqualified in this case.
