
   NORFOLK AND WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, ET AL., PETITIONERS V.
AMERICAN TRAIN DISPATCHERS' ASSOCIATION, ET AL.

   CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC., PETITIONERS V. BROTHERHOOD OF RAILWAY
CARMEN, ET AL.

   No. 89-1027, No. 89-1028

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1990

   On Writs Of Certiorari To The United States Court of Appeals For
The District Of Columbia Circuit

   Reply Brief For The Federal Respondents Supporting Petitioners

   Section 11341(a) of the Interstate Commerce Act (ICA) provides that
a participant in an ICC-approved merger transaction "is exempt from
the antitrust laws and all other law, including State and municipal
law, as necessary to let that person carry out the transaction" (49
U.S.C. 11341(a)).  The question in this case is whether Section
11341(a)'s exemption shields the participant from enforcement of
contractual provisions that otherwise would thwart implementation of
the merger.  See 89-1027 Pet. i.  We explained in our opening brief
that Section 11341(a) means what it says:  it exempts the participant
from all law, including laws governing the negotiation and enforcement
of collective bargaining agreements, to the extent necessary to
implement the ICC approved transaction.  The court of appeals thus
erred in concluding that Section 11341(a) reaches only "positive
enactments" and does not preempt laws effectuating contractual rights.
 Pet. App. 12a-19a.

   We restate the question presented in this case because the union
respondents exhibit little interest in addressing it.  The union
respondents do not contest our basic proposition that Section 11341(a)
exempts a carrier from enforcement of contractual provisions that
otherwise would thwart implementation of a merger.  Nor do they make
any attempt to defend the court of appeals' view that Section 11341(a)
is somehow inapplicable here because it reaches only "positive
enactments." Pet. App. 18a.  Indeed, the union respondents ultimately
concede that Section 11341(a) exempts rail carriers from enforcement
of contractual obligations involving the "capital structure" of their
railroads.  Resp. Br. 43 n.57 (acknowledging Schwabacher v. United
States, 334 U.S. 182 (1948)).  They contend, instead, that Section
11341(a) does not apply in this case because the ICC lacks "control
over labor matters." Resp. Br. 43 & n.57.  See also id. at 16, 24, 26,
33.  They then invite this Court to decide an entirely different
question -- one that the court of appeals did not reach, that is the
subject of the ICC's proceedings on remand, and that presently is in
an interlocutory posture:  namely, the ICC's responsibility to impose
labor protective conditions under Section 11347 of the ICA.

   1. The union respondents do not defend the court of appeals'
reasoning.  The threshold problem with the unions' position is that it
bears no relation to what the court of appeals actually decided.  The
court of appeals did not rule that Section 11341(a) is inapplicable to
the enforcement of collective bargaining agreements because those
contracts involve labor matters.  The court ruled that Section
11341(a) does not apply to enforcement of collective bargaining
agreements because Section 11341(a) does not apply to enforcement of
contracts of any type.  Pet. App. 12a-19a.  /1/ In the court of
appeals' view, Section 11341(a) reaches only "positive enactments, not
common law rules of liability, as on a contract." Pet. App. 18a.  /2/

   The union respondents are entitled, of course, to defend a judgment
on grounds other than those stated in the court of appeals' opinion.
But in making that election, they tacitly concede that the court of
appeals' rationale is indefensible.  That concession is
understandable.  As we explained in our opening brief (at 22-27),
Section 11341(a) gives a participant in an ICC-approved transaction an
express exemption from all law to the extent necessary to carry out
the transaction, and the term "law" is understood to include common
law rules as well as statutes.  See, e.g., Illinois v. City of
Milwaukee, 406 U.S. 91, 99-101 (1972);  Warren v. United States, 340
U.S. 523, 526 (1951);  Erie R.R. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 78-79
(1938).  Furthermore, this Court, in Schwabacher, 334 U.S. at 195-201,
held that the substantively identical precursor of Section 11341(a),
Section 5(11) of the ICA, exempts a participant in an ICC-approved
transaction from enforcement of contractual rights -- in that case the
contractual rights of a carrier's minority shareholders.  See Fed.
Resp. Br. 27-28.  The union respondents have no answer to these points
beyond the assertion that they are "inapposite" in this instance
because this case involves "labor matters." Resp. Br. 43 n.57.

   2. The union respondents' position is contradicted by the plain
language of Section 11341(a).  The union respondents argued to the
court of appeals that Section 11341(a) does not reach labor matters,
and that court, for good reason, chose not to accept the argument.
Section 11341(a), by its terms, does not give "labor matters" special
treatment.  The union respondents contend that Section 11341(a)'s
"plain language" supports their assertion (Resp. Br. 24), but they
fail to confront (or even acknowledge) the words Congress actually
used.  Section 11341(a) expressly exempts participants in ICC approved
transactions "from the antitrust laws and from all other law." 49
U.S.C. 11341(a).  /3/ It makes no mention whatever of a special
exception in the case of labor matters.  Instead, the Section 11341(a)
exemption is subject to only one very important qualification:  the
exemption extends only so far "as necessary to let that person carry
out the transaction." 49 U.S.C. 11341(a).  /4/ See ICC v. Brotherhood
of Locomotive Engineers, 482 U.S. 270, 298-300 (1987) (Stevens, J.,
concurring).

   3. The union respondents' argument that the ICC has no
"jurisdiction" over labor matters is neither relevant nor correct.
The union respondents repeatedly assert that Section 11341(a) should
be given a more restrictive reading because the ICC lacks
"jurisdiction," "authority," or "control over labor matters." Resp.
Br. 16, 24-25, 26, 33, 35, 36, 41, 43 & n.57.  This argument fails for
two reasons.  First, the applicability of Section 11341(a)'s exemption
does not depend on whether the ICC has "jurisdiction" over the subject
matter of the preempted law -- Section 11341(a) expressly exempts
participants from the "antitrust laws and all other laws" as necessary
to carry out an ICC approved transaction.  49 U.S.C. 11341(a).
Second, the union respondents' assertion is simply not correct;  the
ICC's empowering statute requires the agency to consider and address
labor matters.

   One of the purposes of the ICA's national transportation policy,
which is administered by the ICC, is "to promote a safe and efficient
rail transportation system" while "encourag(ing) fair wages and safe
and suitable working conditions in the railroad industry" (49 U.S.C.
10101a).  The ICA gives the ICC "exclusive" authority over
transactions involving the consolidation, merger, or acquisition of
control of rail carriers (49 U.S.C. 11341(a), 11343).  These
transactions inevitably affect labor.  See United States v. Lowden,
308 U.S. 225, 233 (1939).  The ICA therefore expressly requires the
ICC to consider labor matters when performing its "public interest"
review of a proposed transaction (49 U.S.C. 11344), and the ICA
expressly requires the ICC "to provide a fair arrangement" for
"employees who are affected by the transaction" (49 U.S.C. 11347).
The union respondents' blanket assertions that Section 11341(a) does
not apply to labor matters because the ICC has no jurisdiction over
such matters cannot be reconciled with the plain terms of the ICA.

   4. The union respondents incorrectly assert that their
interpretation is consistent with past practices.  Because the ICA's
language provides no comfort for their position, the union respondents
must look to other sources for support.  They turn first to historical
practices.  The unions argue (Br. 26-27) that the ICC historically has
declined to exercise jurisdiction over labor matters.  That is not so.
 See, e.g., Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n v. United States, 339 U.S.
142 (1950);  Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers v. Chicago & N.W.
Ry., 314 F.2d 424 (8th Cir. 1963);  Norfolk & W. Ry. and New York, C.
& St. L. R.R. -- Merger, Etc., 347 I.C.C. 506 (1974).  The union
respondents also rely on a 1934 statement of the Chairman of the ICC
that the agency has "no jurisdiction over labor matters." Resp. Br.
26-27.  As the unions acknowledge, however, that statement was
addressed to the specific question whether the ICC should assist in
the enforcement of the RLA.  Ibid.  Moreover, it was made six years
prior to Congress's addition to the ICA of the requirement that the
ICC impose labor protective conditions on ICC-approved transactions.
See Fed. Resp. Br. 35-38.

   The union respondents next observe (Br. 13 n.26, 27-29) that, in
the past, railroads have occasionally entered into various "lifetime
employment" agreements with rail unions in connection with ICC
approved mergers.  The unions contend that railroads would not have
agreed to such terms if Section 11341(a) had preempted enforcement of
the existing collective bargaining agreements.  But any such inference
is unwarranted.  The railroads may have had other reasons for entering
into those agreements.  They may have concluded that Section 11341(a)
would not permit the labor rearrangements they sought because those
rearrangements were not "necessary" to carry out their transactions.
See 49 U.S.C. 11341(a).  The railroads may have sought to avoid
litigation or may have found the terms of the "lifetime employment"
agreements desirable even if not required.  Thus, the existence of
those agreements does not provide any useful guidance on the meaning
of Section 11341(a).  /5/

   The union respondents next argue (Br. 28-32) that the ICC's
interpretation of Section 11341(a) is a recent innovation.  But the
ICC expressly stated, as early as 1974, that Section 11341 and its
precursors reach collective bargaining rights.  See Norfolk & W. Ry.
and New York, C. & St. L. R.R. -- Merger, Etc., 347 I.C.C. 506,
511-512 (1974) ("the Commission may relieve the railroad from the
requirements of (the Railway Labor Act) insofar as is necessary to
carry into effect the transaction approved pursuant to section 5(2)").
 /6/ And the courts have applied that interpretation as early as 1963.
 Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers v. Chicago & N.W. Ry., 314 F.2d
424, 432 (8th Cir. 1963) ("We find no express or implied exception of
the provisions of the Railway Labor Act from the operative provisions
of Section 5(11).").  The unions cite (Br. 29-32) two ICC cases that,
in their view, indicate that Section 11341(a) does not preempt
enforcement of collective bargaining agreements.  In both of those
cases, however, the ICC stated that the rail carriers were not
entitled to Section 11341(a) relief because the requested exemption
was not necessary to carry out the ICC-approved transaction.  /7/

   The union respondents also assert (Br. 32-33) that the ICC has no
"expertise" in labor relations.  The ICC, however, administers the ICA
and obviously is the expert agency as to the interpretation and
application of the ICA's labor provisions.  Moreover, the ICC cases
that the unions cite in support of their assertion involve the ICC's
referral of disputes to arbitrators appointed pursuant to the ICC's
labor protective conditions (49 U.S.C. 11347).  The ICC has authority
to review those arbitration decisions, Chicago & N.W. Transp. Co. --
Abandonment, 366 I.C.C. 373 (1987), aff'd sub nom.  International
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers v. ICC, 862 F.2d 330 (D.C. Cir.
1988).  The ICC's referral of these matters simply reflects a sensible
use of the arbitration process.  See United Transp. Union v. United
States, 905 F.2d 463, 470 (D.C. Cir. 1990).

   5. The union respondents incorrectly assert that the ICA's
legislative history supports their interpretation.  The union
respondents also argue (Br. 33-44) that the ICA's legislative history
supports their contention that Section 11341(a) contains an implicit
exception for labor matters.  As we explain in our opening brief (at
29-38), that assertion is incorrect.  The legislative record indicates
that Section 11341(a) was enacted to encourage mergers and
consolidations, which -- as Congress must have realized -- almost
invariably require extensive rearrangement of work forces and
alteration of collective bargaining agreements.  See Lowden, 308 U.S.
at 232-234.  Moreover, on two occasions -- in 1933, and again in 1940
-- Congress expressly refused to narrow the scope of the ICC's
consolidation authority by carving out a special exception for
obligations arising from labor agreements.  See Fed. Resp. Br. 30-38.

   a. As we explained in our opening brief (at 30-34), the Emergency
Railroad Transportation Act of 1933 (ERTA) contained temporary
provisions (Title I) and permanent provisions (Title II) concerning
rail consolidations.  Section 10(a) exempted carriers affected by
orders under Title I from other legal "restraints or prohibitions,"
see Section 10(a), 48 Stat. 215, but also contained a proviso
expressly preserving collective bargaining agreements.  Ibid.  Section
202(15) exempted carriers affected by orders under Title II from other
legal "restraints and prohibitions," but it did not contain any such
proviso.  See Section 202(15), 48 Stat. 219.  As we also pointed out
(Br. 33-34), Congress's decision to include a proviso preserving
collective bargaining agreements in the temporary provisions of Title
I, but not to include such a proviso in Section 202(15) as part of the
permanent provisions of Title II, confirms Congress's intent that
Section 202(15) could operate to limit the enforcement of collective
bargaining agreements.  See, e.g., Russello v. United States, 464 U.S.
16, 23 (1983).  And it is Section 202(15) that is now Section
11341(a).

   The union respondents attempt, unsuccessfully, to rebut that
inference.  They argue (Br. 37-38) that Section 10(a) in Title I
contained the proviso protecting collective bargaining rights because
it addressed the authority of the Federal Railroad Coordinator, who
had jurisdiction over labor matters.  The unions then contend that
there was no need to state this restriction expressly in Section
202(15) in Title II because it dealt with the authority of the ICC,
which (in the unions' view) did not have power over labor matters.
This distinction between the role of the Coordinator and that of the
ICC is both inapposite and flawed.  The unions mistakenly presume that
carriers acting pursuant to ERTA orders were exempt from legal
"restraints or prohibitions" (Section 10(a), 48 Stat. 215;  Section
202(15), 48 Stat. 219) only to the extent that the restraint or
prohibition fell within the subject matter jurisdiction of the agency
that issued the order.  Neither Section 10(a) nor Section 202(15)
contained any such limitation;  instead, carriers were "relieved from
the operation of the antitrust laws * * * and of all other restraints
or prohibitions by or imposed under authority of law, State or
Federal, insofar as may be necessary to enable them to do anything
authorized or required by such order." Section 202(15), 48 Stat. 219
(emphasis added).  /8/

   In any event, Section 10(a) does not support the union respondents'
distinction between the role of the Coordinator and the role of the
ICC.  Section 10(a)'s exemption and its associated proviso apply to
actions taken by the Coordinator or the ICC pursuant to Title I.  See
Section 10(a), 48 Stat. 215 ("The carriers or subsidiaries subject to
the Interstate Commerce Act, as amended, affected by any order of the
Coordinator or Commission made pursuant to this title shall, so long
as such order is in effect, be, and they are hereby, relieved from the
operation of the antitrust laws * * * and of all other restraints or
prohibitions by law * * *.") (emphasis added).  Title I provided that
the ICC had authority to review and, if necessary, modify the
Coordinator's orders and hence the ICC's power over labor matters was
of comparable scope.  See ERTA Section 9, 48 Stat. 214-215.

   b. Nor do the union respondents have an adequate response to
Congress's actions in 1940.  As we stated in our opening brief (at
35-38), when Congress enacted the Transportation Act of 1940, further
amending the ICA, it specifically rejected an amendment that the
unions now insist is the law.  Representative Harrington's proposed
amendment would have prohibited "the impairment of existing employment
rights of said employees." See 84 Cong. Rec. 9882 (1939).  Congress
rejected the Harrington Amendment and enacted in its place a provision
(Section 5(2), now codified as Section 11347 of the ICA) that directs
the ICC to require a "fair and equitable arrangement" for employees
who are adversely affected by ICC approved transactions.  Section 7,
54 Stat. 906-907.  See Fed. Resp. Br. 35-38.  The union respondents
argue (Br. 39 n.55) that Congress "modified" -- rather than "rejected"
-- the Harrington Amendment.  Even if one accepts the unions' semantic
distinction, our point remains valid:  "Congress d(id) not intend sub
silentio to enact statutory language that it ha(d) earlier discarded
in favor of other language." INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421,
442-443 (1987).  See Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employes v.
United States 366 U.S. 175-177 (1961).

   6. The union respondents' reliance on Section 11347 is misplaced.
The union respondents next argue (Br. 45-47) that Section 11347
prohibits the ICC from modifying or eliminating an employee's
contractual rights.  The issue decided by the court of appeals and the
issue before this Court is whether Section 11341(a) exempts
participants from enforcement of contractual obligations.  See Pet.
App. 12a-19a.  More specifically, the question is whether Section
11341(a)'s phrase "all other law" includes the law governing the
enforcement of contracts in general and collective bargaining
agreements in particular.  The unions invite this Court to resolve a
wholly distinct issue -- the meaning of Section 11347 -- that the
court of appeals did not decide, that the ICC has addressed in the
remand proceedings, and that the court of appeals has not yet had an
opportunity to review.  /9/

   Section 11347, which originated in the Transportation Act of 1940
(see p. 11, supra), directs the ICC to impose conditions on
ICC-approved transactions requiring carriers "to provide a fair
arrangement" for employees who are adversely affected by
implementation of the transaction.  49 U.S.C. 11347.  Rail labor and
rail management have been engaged in a longstanding dispute over the
content and import of those conditions.  Rail labor contends that
under Section 11347 the ICC must impose, as a term of the ICC-approved
transaction, requirements that the carriers' employees retain all of
their rights under the RLA and existing collective bargaining
agreements and receive certain additional compensation.  See Resp. Br.
45-47.  Rail management disagrees, contending that Section 11347
requires the ICC to impose terms that provide for arbitration of
disputes arising from work force adjustments and for compensation to
employees adversely affected by the transaction.  See 89-1027 Pet. Br.
43-47.

   We submit that if Section 11347 has any relevance to the present
issue, it cuts against the unions' position.  Congress enacted Section
11347 in recognition that employees would be adversely affected by
ICC-approved transactions.  See Fed. Resp. Br. 37-38.  Congress's
requirement of protective conditions with respect to those effects
evidences Congress's view that implementation of ICC-approved rail
consolidations and mergers is likely to impair collective bargaining
agreements.  Beyond this limited observation, which takes note of the
parallel existence of Section 11347 and its announced purpose, we
believe it is neither necessary nor provident for this Court to reach
a concluded view on the meaning of that Section.  Section 11341(a)
concerns the legal consequences flowing from ICC approval of a rail
transaction.  That issue, as Schwabacher illustrates, has importance
outside of, as well as within, the rail labor context.  Section 11347
is concerned solely with what labor terms must be included as part of
the transaction.  The resolution of the Section 11341(a) issue is
critical, but it will not finally determine labor's rights.

   Moreover, the ICC issued a decision, following the court of
appeals' remand of the record in this case, that addresses the ICC's
responsibility under Section 11347.  See CSX Corp. -- Control --
Chessie System, Inc. & Seaboard Coast Line Industries, Inc., 6 I.C.C.
2d 715 (1990).  That decision is subject to judicial review in the
court of appeals.  This Court, in turn, will have the opportunity to
review, if necessary and after full briefing, the court of appeals'
considered judgment on this matter.

   7. The ICC's interpretation of Section 11341(a) does not deprive
parties of Fifth Amendment rights.  The union respondents contend (Br.
47-50) that the ICC's interpretation of Section 11341(a) would deprive
the unions (and presumably those they represent) of property in
violation of the Due Process and Just Compensation Clauses of the
Fifth Amendment.  There is no merit to that contention.  As the unions
concede (Br. 48), it has long been settled that Congress may limit or
bar the enforcement of existing contracts if it rationally concludes
that such action is in the public interest.  See Wilson v. New, 243
U.S. 332, 348-354 (1917);  Louisville & Nashville R.R. v. Mottley, 219
U.S. 467, 480-481 (1911).  Section 11341(a) plainly satisfies that
test:  it exempts a carrier from enforcement of contractual provisions
to the extent necessary to permit the carrier to implement a
transaction that has been found to be in the public interest.

   The unions' claim of contractual impairment is particularly weak in
this case because the collective bargaining agreements at issue were
entered into long after Section 11341(a) had become an established
part of the legal landscape.  Section 11341(a) dates back to the
Transportation Act of 1920, and has for 70 years been a part of the
legal context in which rail labor agreements have been negotiated.
Thus, the union respondents' contracts were necessarily subject to
Section 11341(a)'s preemptive effect at the time they were negotiated,
and no claim of an unconstitutional taking can arise from the
incidence of that effect.  Indeed, even if the unions could claim
deprivation of a property right, the ICA's labor protective
conditions, set forth in Section 11347, would assure compensation for
any such deprivation.

   8. The union respondents' arguments cannot be reconciled with the
purpose of the ICA consolidation provisions.  The ICA's consolidation
provisions are intended to foster those mergers that are in the public
interest, while at the same time accommodating to the fullest extent
possible the competing claims of persons, including employees, who may
be adversely affected by the transactions.  See Fed. Resp. Br. 39-40.
The ICA is particularly solicitous of rail labor interests:  the ICC
must take into account the interests of rail employees when conducting
its public interest review (49 U.S.C. 11344(b)) and must impose
special conditions to protect the interests of employees who are
adversely affected by the transaction (49 U.S.C. 11347).  Finally,
Section 11341(a) exempts a participant from other law, but only to the
extent "necessary to let that person carry out the transaction." 49
U.S.C. 11341(a).  Notwithstanding these provisions, the union
respondents insist that rail employees are entitled to full
enforcement, under the Railway Labor Act, of all of the terms of their
collective bargaining agreements.  The RLA's "virtually endless"
process would pose a serious impediment to the consummation of rail
mergers.  See Fed. Resp. Br. 40-42.  Section 11341(a) does not
implicitly except that process, uniquely among "all other law" (49
U.S.C. 11341(a)), from its preemptive sweep.

                              CONCLUSION

   For the foregoing reasons, and the reasons stated in our opening
brief, the judgment of the court of appeals should be reversed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   JOHN G. ROBERTS, JR.

      Acting Solicitor General /10/

   ROBERT S. BURK

      General Counsel Interstate Commerce Commission

   NOVEMBER 1990

   /1/ The court of appeals spoke in terms of "overrid(ing) contracts"
(Pet. App. 12a);  however, as we explained in our opening brief (at
22, 24-26), contracts derive their enforceability from common or
statute law -- in this case the Railway Labor Act (RLA), 45 U.S.C. 151
et seq.

   /2/ That the court of appeals approached the question as one
involving all contracts, and not simply collective bargaining
agreements, is evident from its concern that acceptance of the
governments' argument would give the ICC power to override a
"carrier's solemn undertaking, in a bond indenture or a bank loan."
Pet. App. 13a.  See also, e.g., id. at 12a ("Nowhere does (Section
11341(a)) say that the ICC may also override contracts, nor has it
ever * * * included even a general reference to 'contracts' much less
any specific reference to (collective bargaining agreements).");  id.
at 18a ("We are confident that Congress did not intend, when it
enacted the immunity provision, to override contracts.");  ibid.
("Congress exhibited a healthy respect for privately negotiated
contracts.").

   /3/ The union respondents characterize Section 11341(a) as "an
implied repeal statute" (Resp. Br. 24).  There is, however, nothing
"implied" in the statute at all.  By its terms, Section 11341(a)
expressly exempts participants from all law as necessary to implement
an ICC approved transaction.

   /4/ The court of appeals did not reach the question of what
constitutes necessity within the meaning of the exemption, and that
issue is not presently before the Court in this case.

   /5/ The union respondents also contend (Br. 7 n.12) that the effect
of the ICC's interpretation of Section 11341(a) is to render
"unnecessary" the making of such agreements.  That is not accurate.
The railroads may continue to find such agreements useful for the
reasons we describe in the text.

   /6/ In any event, an agency is entitled to revisit, refine, and
reformulate its interpretations in light of its evolving wisdom and
experience.  See, e.g., NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc., 110
S. Ct. 1542, 1549 (1990);  NLRB v. J. Weingarten, 420 U.S. 251,
265-266 (1975).

   /7/ See Southern Ry. -- Control -- Central of Ga. Ry., 331 I.C.C.
151, 170 (1967) ("By its terms, section 5(11) applies only to
antitrust and other restraints of law from carrying 'into effect the
transaction so approved . . .'.  Neither the Washington Agreement nor
the specific collective bargaining agreements between these roads and
their employees is such a restraint * * *.");  Chicago, St. P., M. &
O. Ry. -- Lease, 295 I.C.C. 696, 702 (1958) ("It is apparent that the
Railway Labor Act has not prevented the North Western from
effectuating the transaction authorized by the prior order.").

   /8/ As we have observed (p. 5, supra), the union respondents employ
the same mistaken premise with respect to Section 11341(a).

   /9/ The union respondents raise a number of other issues that are
not presented in this case, including whether the overriding of
contractual obligations was, in the particular circumstances,
"necessary" to the transaction (Br. 26), and the particular facets of
the "Orange Book" agreements (Br. 46 n.59), a matter peculiar to
certain aspects of the dispute in No. 89-1028.

   /10/ The Solicitor General is disqualified in this case.
