Remarks to
Commission on the Advancement of Women and Minorities in
Science, Engineering, and Technology (CAWMSET)


October 6, 1999
Seattle, Washington


Dr. Diana S. Natalicio and Dr. Eve L. Menger
National Science Board


On behalf of the National Science Board, we are pleased to testify to
the Commission on the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science,
Engineering, and Technology Development.  As members of the Board, we
are proud of its commitment to enhance the participation of citizens in
the U.S. science and technology workforce.  The NSB is itself a diverse
body of 24 presidential appointees.  More than a third of the members
are women, another third are ethnic minorities, and one member is
visually impaired.

We speak as well from complementary perspectives.  One of us is
president of the University of Texas at El Paso, with a faculty 28
percent minority and an undergraduate population that is three-quarters
Hispanic.  The other has now retired from Corning Inc. after a career in
both academic and industrial research.  Through our professional
experiences, we know the value of diversity for higher education and for
our Nation.

Role of the NSB
The National Science Foundation Act of 1950, which created the National
Science Foundation (NSF), makes the Board responsible for establishing
the policies of the Foundation.  The Act also directs the Board to
advise the President and Congress, ". . . regarding policy matters
related to science and engineering and education in science and
engineering . . ."

Forty-nine years later, the Board's awareness about the need to expand
the pool of talent seeking preparation for careers in science and
engineering fields is acute, and its impatience with the pace of
progress very real.  NSF programs have been a beacon of opportunity for
groups underrepresented and underserved in science and technology (S&T).
From pre-Kindergarten through secondary teaching and learning of
mathematics and science, to supplying the links to baccalaureate and
graduate education and into the high-tech workforce, NSF offers
programmatic support.

NSF's commitment to participation in S&T is unflagging.  It has to be.
On the threshold of the 21st century, we face this contradiction in our
merit-based society:   country of origin, gender, and skin color are not
supposed to matter - but they still do.  And the advantages that accrue
to some mean, in the eyes of many, that disadvantages must accrue to
others.  That zero-sum mentality is dangerous, misleading, and
represents both bad thinking and bad policy.  As a Nation, we are only
as strong as our weakest link.  The challenge is to devise strategies
for cultivating the talent pool.  That is what this Commission must
identify, promote, and ensure.

NSB Action on Human Resources
In November 1998, the Board issued a strategic plan that outlines its
focus for the near term.  Prominent among them is "Educating the
National Workforce."  Emerging from the Board's consideration of this
issue, and human resource development more generally, are the following:

* Local communities must decide what is best for their children and
schools, but there is a national interest in improving student
achievement and in determining what every student in a grade should know
and be able to do in math and science.
* Engaging all students in math and science inquiry develops not only
skills and knowledge, but also a foundation for future thinking in the
workplace, home, and community; and
* Formal education must be seen as a seamless system, K-16 and beyond.
A sense of shared responsibility for preparing, nurturing, and mentoring
students and teachers must be forged.  The challenge is rewarding those
individual and institutional efforts that serve a broader conception of
teaching and learning.

The segments of the formal educational process - elementary, middle, and
high school, undergraduate and graduate study - reinforce a
specialization in objectives (in, e.g., curriculum, materials,
certification, and testing) that pose barriers to learning.  The Board
has resolved to encourage - through policy guidance, partnerships, and
outreach - the involvement of scientists and engineers in the
improvement of K-12 education, both individually and through their
employing institutions and professional associations.

This resolution supports two national needs - the assurance of a
skilled, highly educated, and diverse workforce, and a public that is
not just well disposed toward science but one that is able as well to
use its knowledge of science and mathematics. The Board's concerns
encompass the full range of these needs.

The NSB has already considered the disturbing implications of the Third
International Mathematics and Science Study.  A Board report, issued in
March 1999, titled Failing Our Children:  Math and Science Education in
the National Interest  (NSB 99-31, available at
www.nsf.gov/nsb/documents/), presents recommendations for improving
teaching and learning to parents, local communities, and particularly
scientists and engineers in institutions of higher education.

The Board has also examined (February 1998) issues of higher education -
especially graduate and postdoctoral training - in science and
engineering.  It  recommended:
* the appropriate breadth and focus in education and training responsive
to the growing diversity of career and employment opportunities;
* the development of reward systems that support mentoring and outreach;
* the enhancement of collaboration among disciplines as well as research
and non-research institutions; and
* improved data to identify current and emerging national needs for the
science and engineering workforce.

The 1980 congressional reauthorization of NSF charges the agency with
the responsibility to increase participation of groups historically
underrepresented in science and engineering.  That authority stands,
though the Adarand decision inhibits certain strategies - programs
targeted to specific groups.

We know from countless studies that a gap in opportunity precedes the
gap in performance observed between majority and minority students.  The
gap also arouses concerns about the criteria affecting the transitions
from recruitment-admissions-and-retention-to-degree-taking.  How does
dependence on the SAT/ACT, GRE, and other standardized tests filter
students inappropriately and/or unfairly?  Are we using the wrong
"gates" for gatekeeping entry to the science and engineering workforce?

Data on college enrollment and retention (from sources such as NSF,
NCES, ETS, and NACME) are now routinely accompanied by stories in the
mass media and higher education press about lawsuits that impinge on
institutions, their admissions criteria, and selection processes - and
not just in Texas, California, Michigan, or Washington State.

The lack of diversity among S&T professionals across sectors and in the
leadership of SMET disciplines is exacerbated by the current legal
climate.  Federal support targeted to certain groups has evolved into
strategies aimed at institutions that serve large numbers of minority
students (such as NSF's Alliances for Minority Participation), featuring
partnerships with research universities willing to share faculty,
facilities, and equipment.

Lessons from NSB Hearings
Throughout last year, the Board, through its Committee on Education and
Human Resources, undertook a series of field hearings on topics sampled
from NSF's Education and Training portfolio.  The hearings enabled the
Board to hear first-hand from NSF's constituents in the science,
engineering, and education communities around the U.S.

The NSB Field Hearing hosted by the Chicago Public Schools (July 1998)
illustrated the painstaking process of reform of urban schools.
Educating diverse populations with language, poverty, and deficits in
academic preparation challenge teachers, schools, and political leaders
is more the norm than the exception.  It is imperative, therefore, to
evaluate the changes implemented under NSF's Urban Systemic Program.

Perhaps the clearest statement of the link between school and work that
the Board heard to date was at its hearing a year ago in Puerto Rico.
Higher education, focused at the U. of Puerto Rico campuses, is strongly
engaged in K-12 education reform.  Math and science are seen as
preparation for higher education, entry to the high-tech workforce, and
the economic development of the island.  All students are viewed as
future human capital - some will pursue careers in S&T, most will join a
science-literate workforce as citizens, and a few will become societal
leaders.

Both in Puerto Rico and Chicago, there was explicit recognition that for
those who otherwise would be consigned to a bleak future, academic
achievement is a way out and up in society.  The hearings focused on
preparation, the transition to next stages of the "talent pool," and the
role of two- and four-year colleges in nurturing workplace skills.
Mentorship emerged as a critical ingredient in academic planning and
success. (But as we all know, it is easy to advocate mentorship, but
hard to do - and harder yet to reward).

Concluding Thoughts
It remains to be seen how NSF awards can increase student access to
science-based careers while not targeting certain groups.  How to
cultivate an increasingly diverse student body to renew the workforce of
a global economy demands quality science education at the K-12 level.
Ours could be far better, especially for urban and rural students born
into disadvantaged circumstances, and for schools lacking the resources
that support the learning of 21st century math and science from
well-trained, -equipped, and -rewarded teachers.

Only concerted action will achieve greater participation by those who
have not traditionally identified mathematics and science education with
their future careers and citizenship.  Making the possibility of a
science-informed future a reality for all students is our collective
responsibility.  We must act in our national self-interest to expand the
capabilities of the next generation.  Students at all levels must
reflect the diversity that is America.  Whether we draw on the full
potential of our human resources is entirely up to us.

Finally, we applaud the Commission for undertaking this formidable task.
You are critical for making an important contribution to national
awareness and public policy.  We also believe the recommendations
developed in recent NSB reports are critical for restating the ethic of
participation - and translating expectation into action.  Therefore, we
urge the Commission to endorse and adopt the National Science Board's
recommendations as part of its own.

***

DIANA S. NATALICIO is President of the University of Texas at El Paso, a
position she has held since 1988.  She also serves as Vice Chairman of
the National Science Board, and among others, on boards and advisory
councils for NASA, NIH, the U.S. Department of Education, NACME, and the
American Association for Higher Education.  Her Ph.D. is in linguistics
from the University of Texas at Austin.

EVE L. MENGER is the former Director of Characterization Science &
Services, Corning Inc., and a member of the National Science Board.
Among her previous positions were Vice-Provost for University-Industry
Relations and Professor of Chemistry at the University of Virginia, and
Senior Technical Officer for AlliedSignal Inc.  She serves on several
university and nonprofit advisory boards and committees.  Her Ph.D. is
in chemistry from Harvard University.





1
