NR 97-107
December 4, 1997
                                
Comptroller Applauds States that Permit Competition in Financial
                            Services

WASHINGTON -- Comptroller of the Currency Eugene A. Ludwig
applauded states that permit consumers to enjoy the benefits of
open competition in financial services while at the same time
providing appropriate consumer protections.

In particular, he pointed to Illinois, which recently enacted a
comprehensive package of consumer safeguards that protects
consumers against abusive insurance sales practices by all
providers without putting banks at a competitive disadvantage.

"That adds up to real competition and more choice for consumers,"
he said in a speech to the Consumer Federation of America's
annual financial services conference.  "In the end, it will mean
lower costs for everyone.  And that is something we can all
support."

In his remarks, Mr. Ludwig pointed out that home ownership
depends not only upon the ability of an individual to secure
financing, but also to obtain homeowner insurance.  "All the
budgeting and counseling, the saving and the comparison shopping,
and the most accommodating lender in the world will not do the
trick if affordable property insurance cannot be obtained," he
said.

Mr. Ludwig said consumer organizations have expressed legitimate
concerns about the cross selling of products. "No one would
dispute that we need effective consumer protections to prevent
unfair and deceptive practices."

                            Remarks by

                         Eugene A. Ludwig
                   Comptroller of the Currency

                            before the

                  Consumer Federation of America
                         Washington, D.C.

                         December 4, 1997



It is a pleasure to be with you once again as the CFA begins its
fourth decade of distinguished service to consumers and to a
growing economy -- interests that are truly inseparable.  But it
was not so long ago that a different view prevailed.  Indeed,
when CFA began its work back in 1967, the consumer marketplace
was widely considered to be a zero sum game in which buyers and
sellers could make good only at the other's expense.  Consumer
protections, especially in financial services, were weak. 
Concern about customer satisfaction was too often a matter of lip
service; "take it or leave it" was the message implicit in many
retail transactions back then.  There is little doubt that this
mentality -- at once complacent and confrontational --
contributed to the temporary loss of America's competitive edge
in many key sectors of the consumer economy during the 1970s and
early 1980s. 

Today, it is much clearer that consumer satisfaction has a
significant impact on our nation's general economic well being. 
By making informed, rational choices in the marketplace -- by
demanding fairness, value, and choice -- consumers reward the
best and most efficient providers of goods and services.  In that
way, we preserve and enhance our standard of living and
competitiveness in the global economy. 

For your important contribution to that cause, Steve, you and CFA
deserve our thanks.  CFA's work in promoting consumer education
and meaningful disclosure -- CFA's emphasis on fairness, value,
and choice for consumers -- have helped build a better consumer
marketplace and a better American economy.  Often you have
sounded alarms and proposed practical solutions to the failings
of our dynamic consumer marketplace, particularly in the realm of
financial services.  Today's financial consumer takes for granted
so many of CFA's accomplishments over the years:  from credit
card and savings account disclosure and regulation to check hold
and home equity protections -- to say nothing of the initiatives
that CFA has spearheaded in protecting the consumer in the
insurance and real estate markets.  I know of few advocacy
organizations that have been as effective as CFA.

You knew -- and now we all know -- that a big part of our
economic success as a nation during this century was the result
of recognizing and satisfying the needs of consumers.  This has
certainly been true in banking, especially on the credit side.

One of the great secular trends of the 20th century is what I
often refer to as the democratization of financial services -- a
retail revolution that has transformed the whole complexion of
banking and with it, our whole society.  Once limited to making
short-term loans to accommodate the needs of commerce, commercial
banking today is just as much about households and communities as
it is about business.  A century ago, national banks were
prohibited by law from making mortgage loans; today, banks make
more home purchase loans than any other type of depository
institution.  Early in this century, mainstream bankers denounced
the idea of lending for the purchase of an automobile as
frivolous if not reckless; today, commercial banks own the
biggest share by far of the market for auto loans.  And, within
just a few short years, we have seen the use of the credit card
and other higher technology payment and credit vehicles proceed
from futuristic to commonplace.  Indeed, given current debt loads
and default rates, some have suggested that we may have actually
made access to credit too easy.

Despite what we have achieved, the democratization of financial
services is by no means complete.  There remain important areas
of concern.  One area that I would like to focus on today
concerns the availability of quality financial products to
underserved communities.   For while important strides have been
made within the last several years in serving some of the credit
needs of low and moderate income Americans, the non-credit
financial needs of low and moderate income Americans still are
too often going unmet.

For example, roughly twelve million American households do not
have deposit accounts. Millions of others lack access to
effectively regulated credit and payment services.  Many of these
consumers are frustrated in their efforts to build wealth by the
lack of a formal banking relationship.  CFA and a number of its
member organizations have long advocated greater participation in
the financial sector as an essential element in our efforts to
promote real economic opportunity and equality all across our
country.  Now, as our century comes to a close and as CFA enters
a new decade of service, we must ask anew, how do we get there? 
What steps remain to be taken to bring the millions of under
banked households into the financial mainstream?

To my mind, there are three essential preconditions that must
exist before any plan to increase banking services to underserved
and unserved communities has a chance for success.  First, we
must create an atmosphere that encourages innovation.  Second, we
must establish a balanced regulatory framework.  And third, we
must promote greater competition in the financial services
marketplace.  Innovation, sensible regulation, and competition,
in short, are what I believe to be the keys to increased access
to financial services for low and moderate income Americans. 

Let me turn first to innovation.  As one reviews the long process
by which credit was democratized in this country, two things
stand out.  The first is the extent to which traditionally- held
views that it was not possible to safely or profitably lend to a
particular group or area turned out to be dead wrong.  The second
is that the development of these new credit markets required
product innovation.  The variable rate mortgage, securitization,
the credit card, targeted community development lending,
microfinance and support group lending -- these were all critical
innovations that propelled the development of retail credit
markets in this country.

Interestingly, while innovation has long characterized the retail
credit market, until recently there has been relatively little
innovation in retail service delivery.  The advent of the ATM,
supermarket branch and electronic banking products are
exceptions.  Such innovative delivery approaches are going to
have to become the rule of the future.

This relative lack of  innovation in the non-credit product area
raises two questions.  What caused it?  And what can be done to
encourage greater innovation and product integration that would
help all segments of our population but particularly the
underserved segment?  For answers to these questions, I believe
we have to look at the two other essential preconditions for
expanding access to financial services -- sensible regulation and
competition.

To my mind, for much of this century, the banking industry has
been locked into a regulatory straightjacket that has limited its
ability to innovate.  For example, until very recently, for a
bank to open something as mundane as a point of sale terminal,
enabling customers to make payments at a convenient location,
required a branch application.  And, because of state and
interstate branching restrictions, permission to open this sort
of an innovative branch was often denied. The same thing was true
for mobile delivery of banking services. A mobile delivery
vehicle was also deemed a branch, and, here again, approvals were
often denied because of restrictive rules and regulations.

Moreover, rather than being encouraged to provide integrated
products and services, banks have until fairly recently been
actively discouraged by regulation from providing new products
and services or integrating product and service offerings.

It should go without saying that, in criticizing some regulations
that restrict innovation and competition, I am by no means
criticizing all regulations.  Many regulations on the books are
absolutely necessary to provide adequate consumer protections,
safe and sound operations of financial institutions, and a fair
and open marketplace.  For example, where banks sell multiple
products, it is essential that they be required to make
appropriate disclosures so that consumers know that they are
purchasing what they set out to purchase.

What I am arguing for, instead, is balanced regulation --
regulation that minimizes burden, promotes competition, but at
the same time protects consumers and the economy.

In recent years, I believe we have proved that regulation does
not have to be burdensome to be effective -- indeed, that
regulation can go hand in hand with expanded business
opportunity.  A good example of that -- one in which I take
particular pride -- is the revised Community Reinvestment Act --
a statute long written off as both onerous and ineffectual.  By
refocusing its emphasis from process and paperwork to product and
concrete results, we have seen dramatic increases in community
development lending and investment.  In the past four years,
banks have invested four times as much in community development
projects as they did in the previous 30 years.  During 1996
alone, national banks and their community development partners
invested almost $1.5 billion in community development
corporations and community development projects -- funds used to
produce affordable housing, finance small business, and develop
retail and commercial revitalization projects.

When CRA became law 20 years ago, few thought of it as anything
more than a new imposition on the banking business.  Today it has
become the opening wedge for building profitable relationships
between banks and previously underserved markets.  It has
provided bankers with information -- and incentives -- to assess
and address these markets.  In short, the recent history of CRA
has seen a dramatic and promising shift in emphasis away from
mere compliance to competitive opportunity for providers and
consumers of financial services.

For example, consider how CRA has helped address the banking
needs of native Americans.  On the Navajo reservation, a land
mass the size of the state of West Virginia, there were three
bank branches in operation in 1994.  Today there are 12.  In
1994, the Navajos had two ATMs. Today they have 14.  Regulatory
initiative and CRA obligations certainly helped to highlight the
Navajos' unmet financial needs.  The OCC, for its part, sponsored
the formation of partnerships between the tribal government,
community organizations, and financial institutions, and launched
educational programs that helped break down the barriers of
culture and miscommunication.  But it was a business decision --
and a good one -- on the bankers' part to respond aggressively to
that competitive challenge.  Today, the Navajo branches are
highly profitable -- for the bankers as well as for the Navajos,
who have benefitted from an array of new mortgage and small
business loan programs, as well as easier access to deposit and
other banking services.

The recent history of low and moderate income housing finance
offers another good example of the new possibilities inherent in
competition coupled with enlightened regulation.  The low/mod
market was one bankers had long shunned -- again, in large part
because they lacked both information about that market and
competitive incentives to explore it.  The renewed emphasis on
CRA over the past five years has led many bankers to reconsider
their mortgage lending policies to low and moderate income
communities.  And, lo and behold, they have discovered that most
of these loans perform just as well, if not better, than home
purchase loans to more traditional borrowers.  That experience
has drawn new lenders into the market -- drawn not by the
compulsion of the law but by the magnet of new opportunities for
profit.

Reaching out to new markets requires new and innovative ways of
doing business.  The lessons we are learning from our experiences
in expanding access to credit are leading to improvements in the
broader service area.  The OCC's own research on the needs of the
nontraditional bank customer reaffirms what the experience of the
marketplace tells us:  that first-time home owners sometimes need
more than a mortgage to make their experiences positive ones. 
They need a whole range of ancillary products and services.  We
have found, for example, that the default rates in the affordable
mortgage market are lowest where lenders work with borrowers both
before and after the loan closes, to acquaint them with the
intricacies of the lending process, and to develop budgeting and
household management skills.  We have found that early
intervention programs can be effective in preventing a loan in
trouble from becoming a loan in default.  Of course, none of this
will come as a surprise to CFA, whose efforts to promote consumer
education -- by means such as this conference -- have long been a
model for others to emulate.

In other words, to become successfully integrated into the
economy, we have learned that nontraditional bank customers
benefit from an integrated package of financial products and
services.  There is nothing new in this lesson.  Back around the
turn of this century, in what was heralded as one of the real
financial and social reforms of the day, big employers started to
pay workers their wages by check instead of by cash.  This
obviously made sense for employers, who no longer had to keep
large sums of currency on hand.  But what really commended the
change in policy to its proponents was its expected beneficial
effect on the standard of living of the wage earners.  Having to
cash their paychecks at the bank would presumably make it easier
for wage earners to save and to budget, and less likely that
their earnings would fall prey to theft or their own impulse
spending.

But it didn't work out that way.  Few factory workers had bank
accounts or felt comfortable setting them up.  Instead, local
merchants -- especially saloon keepers -- got into the business
of cashing paychecks for paying customers.  For all the good
intentions with which it was launched, this experiment wound up
doing little to promote thrift -- or sobriety.

This story holds lessons for us today.  Certainly, loans to
first-time homeowners and consumers are important.  But to help
these Americans become full participants in our national
prosperity, it is equally important to provide information about
and access to the whole interrelated menu of financial services. 
As we reach out to underserved markets, we need to embrace a
balanced, integrated approach that includes financial education,
savings and investment products, and low-cost access to the
payments system, as well as credit in its various shapes and
forms.

Some banks have already made important progress in this area. CFA
is especially to be commended for collaborating with financial
institutions in programs to provide comprehensive financial
education.  One of our largest banks recently unveiled a program
that offers employees without bank accounts direct deposit of
paychecks and a debit card, through which funds can be accessed
from ATMs and point-of-sale (POS) locations nationwide.  Other
banks use stored-value cards for the same purpose.  Still other
institutions, which serve large foreign-born populations, allow
people without accounts to electronically transmit funds abroad
for a low flat fee -- an especially important service for
immigrants wishing to send cash to family members outside the
United States.  Such services will become increasingly important
when the law requiring that government payments be transmitted
electronically goes into effect in 1999.

The integrated approach to consumer finance that I am advocating
today bears directly on  the debate going on here in Washington
and in state capitals around the country over financial
modernization.  From the beginning, the OCC's position has been
that genuine financial modernization must advance bank safety and
soundness, promote access to credit, enhance competition, and
lead to lower prices and more options for consumers.  We believe
that all of these goals would be served by legislation that would
permit banks to engage in a wide range of financial activities
and to choose the organizational form that best suits their
business plans, consistent with safety and soundness.

Take the question of insurance powers.  Just like the turn-of-the
century worker whose paycheck was worthless without a place to
cash it, today's aspiring homeowner or small business owner will
get nowhere without property insurance.  Period.  All the
budgeting and counseling, the saving and the comparison shopping,
and the most accommodating lender in the world will not do the
trick if affordable property insurance cannot be obtained.

It simply does not make sense to me that on the one hand we
encourage bankers to reach out and make more home purchase loans
to low and moderate income borrowers or more small business
loans, and then, on the other hand, we tell these same lenders
that they cannot provide the product required to close the
transaction.  Nor does it seem reasonable to deny the customer in
need of insurance the benefits of competition for his business. 
Neither the banker's nor the customer's interest require that the
customer be obliged to go elsewhere to get the insurance he or
she needs.

You and others have expressed legitimate concerns about the
cross-selling of loan and insurance products.  Certainly there is
potential for abuse.  No one would dispute that we need effective
consumer protections to prevent unfair and deceptive practices. 
No one would defend a lender who used pressure tactics to coerce
customers into buying insurance or any other related product. 
And many states, in addressing the question of insurance sales by
banks and other depository institutions, have adopted reasonable
and effective safeguards to prevent such abuses from occurring.

For example, the recently enacted law of the state of Illinois
contains a comprehensive package of consumer protections: 
licensing of bank insurance personnel, full disclosure of the
risks associated with insurance, restrictions on the use and
sharing of confidential customer information consistent with
federal standards, and prohibitions against coercive practices.
 
But, just as important, the Illinois statute does not put banks
at a critical disadvantage in competing with nonbank insurance
providers for the customer's business.  That adds up to real
competition and more choice for consumers.  In the end it will
mean lower costs for everyone. And that is something we can all
support.

The potential exists right now to make very great strides toward
improving the financial well being of all Americans, but
particularly underserved and unserved Americans.  To achieve that
potential, we need to encourage innovation, a balanced and
sensible regulatory environment, and an open marketplace that
serves everyone through genuine competition.  I am confident that
we can take these steps forward.  At the OCC, we are committed to
building on our constructive partnership with CFA to make certain
these steps are taken and taken in a way that ensures a better
world for America and all America's children.

Thank you. 

                              # # #

The OCC charters, regulates and supervises more than 2,600
national banks and 66 federal branches and agencies of foreign
banks in the United States, accounting for 56 percent of the
nation's banking assets.   Its mission is to ensure a safe, sound
and competitive national banking system that supports the
citizens, communities and economy of the United States.