Title: Civilian Police and Multinational
Peacekeeping--A Workshop Series: A Role for
Democratic Policing.
Series: NIJ Research Forum
Author(s): James Burack, William Lewis, Edward
Marks, David H. Bayley, Robert M. Perito,
Michael Berkow
Published: January 1999
Subject(s): Police planning and management,
law enforcement general
62 pages
99,000 bytes

------------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not
included in this ASCII plain-text file. To view
this document in its entirety, download the Adobe
Acrobat graphic file available from this Web site
or order a print copy from NCJRS at 800-851-3420
(877-712-9279 for TTY users).

------------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice

------------------------------

Civilian Police and Multinational Peacekeeping--A
Workshop Series: A Role for Democratic Policing

Research Forum

Cosponsored by Center for Strategic and
International Studies

Police Executive Research Forum

Washington, D.C., October 6, 1997

------------------------------

Janet Reno
Attorney General

Raymond C. Fisher
Associate Attorney General

Laurie Robinson
Assistant Attorney General

No‰l Brennan
Deputy Assistant Attorney General

Jeremy Travis
Director, National Institute of Justice

Office of Justice Programs
World Wide Web Site 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

National Institute of Justice
World Wide Web Site 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij

------------------------------

National Institute of Justice

Civilian Police and Multinational Peacekeeping 
A Workshop Series: A Role for Democratic Policing

James Burack
William Lewis
Edward Marks

Workshop Directors

Washington, D.C., October 6, 1997

Cosponsored by the Center for Strategic and
International Studies and the Police Executive
Research Forum

January 1999

NCJ 172842

------------------------------

NIJ
Jeremy Travis
Director

James Finckenauer
Marvene O'Rourke
Program Monitors

------------------------------

The Professional Conference Series of the National
Institute of Justice supports a variety of live,
researcher-practitioner exchanges, such as
conferences, workshops, planning and development
meetings, and similar support to the criminal
justice field. The Research Forum publication
series was designed to share information from
these forums with a larger audience.

------------------------------

The Center for Strategic and International Studies
(CSIS) is a research institution that analyzes and
measures the impact of public policy. With
resident experts on all the world's major
geographical regions, CSIS covers such key
functional areas as international finance, U.S.
domestic and economic policy, and U.S. foreign
policy and national security. 

------------------------------

The Police Executive Research Forum (PERF), a
national, nonprofit research institute and
membership organization of police executives, is
dedicated to improving the delivery of police
services and crime control and to encouraging
discussion of police and criminal justice issues.

-------------------------------

Opinions or points of view expressed in this
document are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the official position of the
U.S. Department of Justice.

-------------------------------

The National Institute of Justice is a component
of the Office of Justice Programs, which also
includes the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the Office of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and
the Office for Victims of Crime.

-------------------------------

Foreword

Few of us who came of age during the Cold War
expected to witness the end of the bipolarity that
for so long was the central organizing principle
of world politics. We have seen a relaxation of
that superpower rivalry, which formed the subtext
of so many conflicts, but we have not seen it
replaced by a long hoped-for era of global
harmony. On the contrary, what has taken its place
is a multipolarity generated by several new and
unfamiliar variables, among them the centrifugal
forces unleashed by the breakup of the Soviet
Union, the abrupt shift to an unregulated market
economy (accelerated by globalization), the
abandonment of former client states to their own
devices, and the struggle within those states to
rebuild governmental and other institutions on the
basis of democracy and the rule of law. 

The many and widely scattered crises ensuing in
the wake of these developments have created
unprecedented opportunities for third-party
intervention. The good news is that intervention
no longer entails the prospect of a clash between
superpower patrons of the parties in conflict. The
downside is that the major paradigm shift to the
new world order has forced the international
organizations that deal with regional and
intrastate conflict to proceed with outdated
"roadmaps."

Increasingly, civilian police have been introduced
into international peacekeeping operations as a
deterrent or stabilizing factor, joining the
traditionally deployed civilian and military
participants. In this context, the roadmap problem
translates as a lack of systematic, indepth
analysis of the role of civilian police. In
response, the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS) and the Police
Executive Research Forum (PERF), with support from
the National Institute of Justice, joined forces
to tap the experience and expertise of specialists
in the government, nongovernmental organizations,
the military, academia, and private-sector
organizations in identifying specific problem
areas and possible remedial actions. 

A series of workshops begun in 1997 under CSIS and
PERF sponsorship is addressing the roles of
civilian police in "complex emergencies," the
juridical mandate of civil policing in
multinational operations, and how the relationship
of the civilian police to other participants (such
as the military) in these operations should be
defined. Professor David H. Bayley, Dean and
Professor in the School of Criminal Justice at
SUNY-Albany and a specialist in international
criminal justice with a particular interest in
policing, presented the keynote address at the
second workshop in the series. His paper on the
distinguishing features of democratic policing, as
well as other major addresses from the workshop,
are reproduced here.

The National Institute of Justice sponsors studies
of all aspects of policing--enforcement,
prevention, management, and organizational issues-
-under its broad mandate to conduct criminal
justice research. NIJ supported the workshop and
is disseminating the results because advancing the
understanding of policing issues has always been a
major priority and, more recently, the Institute
has recognized international justice reform as a
topic meriting increased attention by researchers
and practitioners alike.

For law enforcement officials in countries either
struggling with complex emergencies or making the
transition to democracy, Professor Bayley's
analysis of responsiveness and accountability as
the distinguishing features of democratic policing
has much value. It also provides pertinent
information for their counterparts in the United
States. 

The number of situations in which the police are
called on to assume responsibility in the context
of international peacekeeping is likely to
increase, making it all the more important to
clearly define their peacekeeping role. Our three
organizations are confident that the workshop
papers and the exchange of ideas will generate
knowledge that can make a useful contribution
toward that end.

Jeremy Travis
Director
National Institute of Justice

Joe Montville
Director, Preventive Diplomacy Program
Center for Strategic and International Studies

Chuck Wexler
Executive Director
Police Executive Research Forum

-------------------------------

Contents:

Foreword

Overview
by William Lewis and Edward Marks

The Contemporary Practices of Policing: A
Comparative View
by David H. Bayley

Managing U.S. Participation in International
Police Operations
by Robert M. Perito

Practical Issues in Providing Policing Assistance
Abroad
by Michael Berkow

Participants' Comments--A Summary

Compendium of Participants' Views 

Appendixes

Workshop Agenda

Biographies of Presenters

Workshop Attendees

-------------------------------

Overview

William Lewis and Edward Marks

The number of states experiencing internal unrest
has multiplied since the end of the Cold War. Not
uncommonly, the unrest has been accompanied by the
breakdown of internal order, the failure of
governing institutions, and the emergence of
displaced and refugee populations--numbering some
45 million people according to United Nations
estimates. In these circumstances, a growing need
for an effective civilian police force has become
evident if reasonably stable internal order is to
be maintained. 

The burgeoning roles of international civilian
police in monitoring and helping to direct the
formation of public safety forces present a unique
challenge to the international community. To
address the issues arising out of complex
humanitarian emergencies and the roles of
international civilian police, the Center for
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), in
collaboration with the Police Executive Research
Forum (PERF) and with the support of the National
Institute of Justice (NIJ), brought together
public safety specialists with experience in
peacekeeping missions in Bosnia, Somalia, Haiti,
and Central America. Also participating in the
workshop were Federal Government officials and
researchers who are concerned with building public
safety institutions in conflict areas of the
world. Held on October 6, 1997, the workshop was
the second in a series on civilian policing and
international peacekeeping. 

Democratic policing principles elaborated

Professor David H. Bayley, Dean of the School of
Criminal Justice in the State University of New
York at Albany and a leading comparative police
scholar with extensive experience in international
affairs, presented the keynote address. The theme
was rebuilding and reforming police institutions
on the basis of democratic policing principles.
The central question Professor Bayley addressed
was how to define the term "democratic policing."
In doing so, he focused on identifying elements
common to all democratic police forces around the
world and found two: responsiveness and
accountability.

Responsiveness requires that the police take their
cue about what they do from the disaggregate
public--not from the state and not from the
government. What problems the public brings to the
police to resolve and how the police respond are a
clear indications of the extent to which
democratic policing practices have been adopted. 

Similarly, accountability to oversight
institutions, independent of ruling regimes, is an
important underpinning of democratic policing.
These institutions may include courts,
legislatures, the media, and complaint review
boards or independent ombudspersons. Democratic
police can be distinguished, ultimately, by their
submission to and acceptance of outside
supervision and examination. 

In seeking to encourage the establishment of
police forces abroad dedicated to responsiveness
and accountability, there are four guiding
principles. First, focus on elements critical to
democratic policing, and avoid the temptation to
replicate in whole or in part other existing
systems or procedures simply because they come
from police forces in democratic countries. 

Second, recognize that substantive, lasting reform
requires sensitivity to and understanding of local
policing traditions and, more important, the host
country's basic cultural values. Reform that
disregards cultural norms is hazardous and very
likely destined to fail. Similarly, superficial
reforms, such as transfers of advanced
technologies to embryonic police forces, are
unlikely to make a significant impact on the
ability of the indigenous force to engage in
democratic policing. 

Third, recognize that police play a central role
in the political life of any society. As a result,
successful reform of the police will require
either the active support or, at the very least,
passive acquiescence of the political forces in
the host nation. Police reform cannot occur if the
host nation's political powers are opposed. 

Fourth, understand that pressures from competing
constituencies and interests can subvert reform.
These pressures come from various sources,
including the imperative for police to provide
internal security to the government, the
international law enforcement community's
conflicting aims, the personal interests of the
individual members of the indigenous police force,
and the diverse interests of the local population. 

Opportunities for improvement identified

The workshop addressed a range of issues related
to the weaknesses of the United Nations (U.N.)
CIVPOL (civilian police) unit, particularly its
inability to provide effective oversight and
logistical support for field operations.
Comparable shortfalls in U.S. support for
international policing were identified and
evaluated. The need for effective integration of
military and civilian policing planning was
accorded special attention by workshop
participants. They also made several
recommendations for remedial action on the part of
the U.N., as well as the United States and other
member states. These recommendations merit serious
consideration by governments involved in past and
current civilian police operations called in
response to complex humanitarian emergencies.

-------------------------------

The Contemporary Practices of Policing: A
Comparative View 

David H. Bayley 

The purpose of this workshop is to examine what
countries such as ours can do to reconstruct and
reform foreign police forces, when the need
arises, so that they can provide security for
their populations in a humane and democratic way.
This is a new mission for the international
community, one that has grown enormously since the
end of the Cold War.[1] Efforts to construct an
effective but democratic police come after
peacemaking; that is, after fundamental conditions
of security have been achieved but before
responsibility for maintaining it is returned to
the indigenous forces. This rebuilding and reform
is sometimes referred to as institution building.
It constitutes a separate agenda of activities for
the international community after military
intervention and the forceful stabilization of
domestic security.

In this paper, I will address the issue of
rebuilding and reforming police institutions
abroad by examining three topics:

--The varieties of world policing. 

--The distinguishing features of democratic
policing.

--The process of managing democratic change
abroad.

Varieties of world policing 

When I was approached to address this workshop, I
was asked to summarize the varieties of police
experience around the world, evidently in the hope
that this tour d'horizon would help policymakers
understand what models of policing they might
select from and also might need to replace.
Frankly, the more I thought about this idea, the
less I liked it. Classifying police systems
globally is an intellectual game that I think is
better left to the academics. I say this not
because police systems cannot be classified
globally, but because such schemes will not inform
the work of this workshop in a useful way. 

For example, police systems have been classified
as "democratic" as opposed to "colonial,"
depending on whether they were established to
serve indigenous populations or to maintain
control by foreign powers. Curiously, Great
Britain created the model for both, which shows
the complexity of police history. Another common
classification distinguishes Anglo-Saxon policing
(decentralized, accountable to law, limited in
functions, democratically controlled) from
Continental policing (centralized rule-making
power, multiple functions, democratic or
authoritarian control) and from communist policing
(centralized, political rather than legal control,
omnibus regulatory functions, authoritarian
polity).[2]

I tried my own hand at this several years ago,
coming up with "Anglo-Saxon," "Authoritarian," and
"Oriental," the latter category distinguished by
the sharing of responsibility for security between
government and populace in social systems founded
on communitarian as opposed to individualist
principles.[3]

In my judgment, all these schemes are
unsatisfactory for informing policy, not because
they are wrong, but because they are arbitrary.
The police is a complex institution; it can be
classified in terms of a very large number of
elements. Any method for classifying police
systems depends entirely on the elements chosen.
For example, one arrives at different
classification schemes depending on whether one
focuses on the national structure of policing,
involvement of the military, range of functions,
accountability, forcefulness, operational
strategies, recruitment requirements, rank
structure, training, pay and benefits, social
composition, equipment, organizational
specialization, and so forth. In the computer
world we are familiar with the expression "garbage
in, garbage out." The analog here would be
"criteria in, classification out." To be useful
for policymaking, the classification exercise
needs to be tied to a particular set of interests.
Because reform of the police needs to involve so
many different facets of organization and
practice, any classification scheme is bound to be
limited, superficial, arbitrary, and problematic. 

Furthermore, all the classification schemes I know
miss what may be the most important trend in world
policing, namely, the rise of private policing.
They do so because they focus on state policing--
on police created by governments. All over the
world, however, in developed and underdeveloped
countries alike, the state is rapidly losing its
monopoly on policing; that is, on the task of
providing security.[4] After centuries of increasing
state control of policing, it is now being
denationalized. Indeed, it is only a slight
exaggeration to say that the authority to provide
security within countries is being refeudalized
among businesses, industrial establishments, gated
communities, neighborhood crime-prevention
organizations, and for-profit security services. 

This seems to be occurring for three main reasons.
First, fear of crime has increased, sometimes
reflecting genuine crime and disorder crises
consequent on rapid social change, at other times
reflecting the exploitation of crime by commercial
media in democratic, market-centered economies.
Second, "mass private property" has increased as a
result of the expansion of free-enterprise
worldwide.[5] ("Mass private property" refers to
space used by the public that is privately owned,
such as shopping malls, banks, office buildings,
sports stadiums, and condominiums.) Although all
mass private property is subject to policing by
the state, security is being provided increasingly
in all of it under private auspices. Third, states
themselves, paradoxically, are encouraging
communities to participate in policing through a
variety of neighborhood-based crime prevention
programs such as Neighborhood Watch, civilian
patrols, police reserves, crime prevention
councils, and police-citizen problem solving. This
sort of public-state partnership is the hallmark
of policing in Japan, Korea, China, and Singapore,
and has been rediscovered in the West under the
banner of community-oriented policing. 

If our purpose in this workshop is to explore how
to create democratic police forces more
successfully abroad, I believe our time is better
spent not in reviewing various classifications of
world police experience but in examining, first,
what democratic policing looks like substantively
and, second, what problems are involved in
creating its specific features abroad.

Distinguishing features of democratic policing

What makes a police force democratic? I think
there are two features--responsiveness and
accountability. Everything else is unimportant in
the sense that it may be compatible with both
democratic and undemocratic forms of policing. 

A police force is democratic when it responds to
the needs of individuals and private groups as
well as the needs of government. Most police
forces in the world are what I call "regime
police," concerned primarily with doing what the
government requires. Democratic police, on the
other hand, orient their activities primarily to
the needs of the disaggregate public. The clearest
sign of this orientation is the emergency
telephone numbers that citizens may use to call
for police assistance. Through this device,
individuals command the services of government in
the form of a uniformed and often armed police
officer who will attend to their immediate
problems, whatever they may be. This is a
remarkable development in the evolution of
government. It constitutes, I believe, an advance
in civilization.

A democratic police force is organized to be
responsive downward; an undemocratic police force
is organized to be responsive upward. I suggest,
therefore, two tests for the "democraticness" of
any police force. First, what proportion of its
work is generated by requests from the
disaggregate public? Second, do people call the
police only at times of desperate need or whenever
they feel the need for authoritative intervention
or effective assistance, regardless of whether
laws have been violated? Although police in the
developed democratic countries frequently complain
about the burden of responding to trivial calls
from the public, I submit that those calls are a
vital indicator of the contribution the police are
making to the political health of the country. 

The second distinguishing feature of democratic
police forces is that they are accountable to
multiple audiences through multiple mechanisms.
Police in developed democratic countries are
watched and supervised by elected politicians; by
civil, criminal, and administrative courts; by the
media; and increasingly by independent
ombudspersons and civilian complaint-review
boards. All of these are supported by
accountability to written, democratically enacted
law. In other words, democratic police forces are
open to monitoring by outsiders. They may not
always like being watched and second-guessed, but
they recognize that this is inevitable in a
democracy. Indeed, reflective police officers
understand that their effectiveness in providing
security depends almost entirely on their willing
acceptance of outside supervision. 

In this connection, I would suggest that a solid
indicator of the democraticness of the police is
whether a country gives visas to foreigners to
study its police operations, because this suggests
openness to outside examination.

In summary, then, our efforts to reform foreign
police forces to make them humane and democratic
should concentrate on making them responsive to
the needs of individuals and private groups and
accountable to multiple external audiences.

Process of managing democratic change abroad

As foreign reformers try to implement these
changes abroad, they should keep four principles
in mind. 

1. Isolate the substance of democratic policing.
First, reformers must separate what is essential
substantively to democratic policing from what is
not. There is a strong tendency for foreign
advisers to advocate the practices they are
familiar with at home. The logic seems to be that
since they come from democratic countries,
whatever their police forces do must be in the
interests of democracy. This is what the Allied
Powers did in Germany and Japan after World War
II. Indeed, the United States, Britain, France,
and Russia set up replicas of their own police
systems in each of their zones of occupation. As
soon as they left, however, both Germans and
Japanese went back to their historical pattern of
organization. 

The favorite reforms that American advisers urge
upon foreign police are decentralizing policing to
local control; combining uniformed patrol and
criminal investigation functions within a single
organization; establishing a nonstratified rank
structure, with recruitment only at the bottom
rank; adopting technological modernization; and,
most recently, incorporating community-oriented
policing. Close examination of contemporary and
historical experience will show, however, that
democratic policing is compatible with the absence
of all of these. None of these necessarily leads
to enhanced responsiveness or accountability.
Indeed, technological enhancement and
community-oriented policing may in various
circumstances be inimical to the development of
democratic policing. Technology may simply make
more efficient a police force whose primary
purpose is serving a repressive regime. It
empowers the repressors, not the forces of
democratic evolution. Community policing, too,
rather than empowering local communities vis ... vis
the police, may become a device for instructing
the populace rather than for listening to it. It
becomes an instrument whereby authoritarian
regimes mobilize and monitor populations, as in
Cuba, China, and the former Soviet Union. In
short, American police advisers must understand
what is democratic in what they do at home.
Unfortunately, very few bring this sort of
perspective to their customary activities.

Another feature that American advisers frequently
insist on is the separation of the police from the
military. This is correct and exceedingly
important, in my view. When I recently reviewed
the extent to which the military participated in
policing in more than 120 countries,[6] I found that
policing was more heavily penetrated by the
military in Latin America than in any other region
of the world. Only Africa south of the Sahara came
close. Police in the Western democracies, as well
as in communist countries, carefully excluded the
military from internal policing. It would appear,
therefore, that the separation of the military
from the police is necessary but not sufficient
for enhancing responsiveness and accountability.
So reformers must understand that while
penetration of policing by the military inhibits
democratic development, separation is not an end
in itself. It is only the beginning of democratic
reform. 

2. Balance the democratic with the achievable.
Foreign reformers must frame their agenda
carefully. They must avoid doing what is easy but
inconsequential, such as pursuing technological
modernization. And they should avoid what is
impossible because of local traditions. Probably
the most resistant feature of policing, but one
that Americans have insisted on trying to change
abroad, is the national structure of the police.
It is an article of faith among Americans that a
decentralized system based on autonomous local
police forces is the hallmark of democracy. This
is what we tried to bring about in Japan and
Germany immediately after World War II, and it is
what we tried again in Bosnia under the Dayton
Accords. I predict that in the latter case, as in
the former, we will fail. 

For institutional reform to succeed abroad, we
must study, therefore, what is democratic in our
own policing and what is achievable given local
traditions abroad. Both of these require careful
comparative analysis. The implication for reform
operations is that the reform agenda must be
carefully planned before intervening abroad. A
successful CIVPOL operation requires the same sort
of advanced planning that the military requires in
foreign operations. Curiously, the American
government has a much greater capacity to
anticipate problems of military involvement where,
arguably, it has overwhelming power, than in
civilian involvement, where it has hardly any
power. 

3. Keep in mind the link of policing to politics.
Reformers must never forget that policing cannot
be separated from politics. Reform will go only as
far as the local political situation will allow.
If the indigenous government is hostile to the
democratic reform of policing, go home. Democratic
reform of the police cannot take place in the face
of undemocratic governments. The police are not
the tail that wags the governmental dog. 

At the same time, police can become downwardly
responsible and more widely accountable through
their own actions if governments are either
ambivalent or indifferent to police affairs.
Reform requires permission from political regimes,
not active direction. Police officials frequently
argue that they cannot undertake reform unless the
political establishment is engaged. This is an
avoidance of responsibility. 

Indifference by the political establishment can be
an opportunity. It provides space for courageous
leaders in the police to work. Hostility on the
part of government, however, is hopeless. In that
case, instituting reform is like beating a dead
horse. 

4. Recognize the pressures under which the police
operate. Reformers must recognize the pressures on
any foreign police force, regardless of local
histories, that will inhibit democratic reform.
Police are susceptible to pressure from the
following four constituencies, all of them
legitimate and all of them potentially able to
impede democratic reform:

--Governments. Governments always put their own
security interests ahead of the public's. It is
naive to expect governments that are under violent
attack, or the threat of violent attack, not to
require the police to protect them first. One sees
this in Sri Lanka, the Punjab, Israel, Northern
Ireland, and apartheid South Africa. This is not
cynical selfishness on the part of political
leaders. Reform of governmental institutions
cannot take place unless there is a stable
political center. Unstable governments rarely
create democratic police forces.

--The international community. The members of
this community have law enforcement interests that
vie with democratic reform for precedence. The
government of the United States, for example,
wants to enlist foreign nations in combating
terrorism, drug trafficking, money laundering, and
illegal immigration. Its specialized agencies,
such as the FBI, DEA, and INS, are more interested
in maintaining or establishing close working
relations abroad than in pressing for
uncomfortable reforms. The enhancement of law
enforcement capability takes precedence over
democratic reform. Their advocacy is not wrong;
they are being true to their mission. But it means
that the international community, including the
United States, often sends conflicting signals to
foreign police about what is important at any
given moment. So, too, do international human
rights groups. Their pressure for the
investigation of human rights violations and the
prosecution of war criminals supports the
effectiveness agenda and, paradoxically, may
deflect local attention, from longer range reforms
involving responsiveness and accountability. 

--The police themselves. The police themselves
have both corporate and personal interests that
must be served, among them levels of remuneration,
immunity from legal harassment, stability of
livelihood, and professional standing within the
community. Policing is an occupation, and its
practitioners cannot realistically be expected to
be more selfless than others. 

--The public. The agenda of the public rarely
coincides altogether with the agendas of any of
the previously described constituencies. It
overlaps but is distinct in emphasis, tending to
focus on personal crimes, disorderly events that
are inconvenient and threatening but not
necessarily criminal, and services that are
urgently required but beyond their own ability to
provide. Unfortunately, this agenda, which
constitutes the heart of democratic police reform,
tends to come last. 

The key to democratic reform, therefore, is to
move rapidly from the agendas of the regime, the
international community, and the police themselves
to the agenda of the dissagregate public. All are
legitimate, all are important. The last, however,
may be the surest way to achieve the others,
although it takes unusual courage on the part of
local police officials to act on this insight. 

Conclusion--being smart

To be successful in achieving democratic police
reform abroad, foreign CIVPOL agents must, above
all things, be smart. The reform enterprise is
highly demanding intellectually. Reformers need to
be smart about:

--What is essential to democratic policing.

--What is democratic in our own police
experience.

--What is unchangeable in local police
traditions.

--The connection between politics and policing. 

--Our own conflicting pressures on foreign
policing. 

Democratic police reform abroad is difficult and
demanding. It cannot be successful if its
practitioners are intellectually lazy. Although
the United States has the intellectual capacity to
succeed in this enterprise, it will do so only if
the issue is given the attention it deserves. 

-------------------------------

Notes

1. Myall, James, ed., The New Interventionism,
1991-1994: United Nations Experience in Cambodia,
Former Yugoslavia, and Somalia, LSE Monographs in
International Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996; and Zartman, William,
Collapsed States: The Disintegration and
Restoration of Legitimate Authority, Boulder,
Colorado: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1995. 

2. Mawby, R.I., Comparative Policing Issues: The
British and American Experience in International
Perspective, London: Unwin Hyman, 1990.

3. Bayley, David H., "A World Perspective on the
Role of the Police in Social Control," in The
Maintenance of Order in Society, Toronto: The
Canadian Police College, 1982; and Bayley, David
H., Patterns of Policing, New Brunswick, New
Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1985.

4. Bayley, David H., and Clifford Shearing, "The
Future of Policing," Law and Society Review 30 (3)
(1996): 585-606.

5. Shearing, Clifford, and Philip Stenning,
"Private Security: Implications for Social
Control," Social Problems 30 (1983): 493. 

6. Bayley, David H., "What's in a Uniform? A
Comparative View of Police-Military Relations in
Latin America," in Between Public Security and
National Security: The Police and Civil-Military
Relations in Latin America, proceedings of the
1994 conference, Miami, Florida: Florida
International University (forthcoming).

-------------------------------

Managing U.S. Participation in International
Police Operations

Robert M. Perito

More than 3,000 international police officers from
53 countries are currently engaged in United
Nations peace operations in 8 countries. The
largest operation is in Bosnia, with 2,027
officers; the smallest and oldest operation is in
Cyprus, with 35 officers. These operations, in
which police from around the world are engaged in
monitoring, mentoring, training, and generally
assisting their local counterparts, provide a
useful perspective from which to view the issues
raised in Professor Bayley's presentation. While a
scholarly analysis is beyond the scope of these
brief remarks, I would like to make a few
observations on how the actual experience in these
operations appears to either support or raise
questions concerning Professor Bayley's
conclusions. This approach is fair, as Professor
Bayley was an active participant in crafting the
U.N. International Police Task Force's (IPTF's)
program for police reform in Bosnia.

Defining democratic policing

In a recent address to a United Nations (U.N.)
seminar on the role of police in peacekeeping,
former IPTF Commissioner Peter Fitzgerald recalled
his experience when he informed the Bosnian police
they would have to adopt international police
standards. When the Bosnians asked for a copy of
the standards, Fitzgerald and his fellow IPTF
officers, who came from different cultures,
traditions, and policing philosophies, discovered
that standards varied widely and determined that
there must be something else they had in common.
That something was a set of democratic principles
that were reflected in the "Commissioner's
Guidance for Democratic Policing in the Federation
of Bosnia-Herzegovina" in May 1996. Professor
Bayley aided in drafting the "Guidance," which
includes model codes of conduct and guidelines on
how policing should be carried out in a democratic
society. These principles formed the basis of
subsequent training programs for the Bosnian
police and are among the most important
contributions the United Nations has made to the
peace implementation process in Bosnia. Now when
someone asks, "What is democratic policing?" there
is an answer.

Managing democratic policing

Professor Bayley is both right and wrong about the
approach taken toward managing democratic police
reform in Bosnia. He believes Americans have a
"knee jerk" reaction in favor of decentralization.
In the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, public
security was the responsibility of 10 cantons with
ethnically segregated police forces. IPTF, with
strong U.S. support, used a common police
certification process. U.S. advisers pressed the
cantons to adopt common procedures, standards, and
codes of conduct. With U.S. backing, IPTF promoted
common institutions such as a civil disorder
management unit made up of police officers from
all cantons and the Federation. All this was done
in an effort to ensure as much commonality as
possible in a situation in which central control
would be anathema. 

Before the conflict, the Yugoslavian police force
contained paramilitary units. Consistent with
Professor Bayley's belief in the importance of
separating the police from the military, the IPTF
program in Bosnia stressed the importance of
creating a completely civilian police force. This
involved rigorous vetting and testing to remove
former fighters; providing new, Western-style
civilian police uniforms; and training in respect
for human dignity and basic police skills for
every police officer. It also included visits to
Germany and the United States to introduce the new
Bosnian police leadership to community policing.
After observing U.S. police officers operating
community centers and providing other
community-related services, some of the Bosnians
have introduced similar programs in their own
police agencies. 

Finally, the international police assistance
effort in Bosnia has been anything but high-tech.
U.S. equipment donations have been limited
primarily to training materials and replacements
of basic equipment and furniture destroyed during
the war. One U.S. police adviser created a
sensation by introducing a preprinted, standard
incident report form at Sarajevo's Centar Station.
The new form replaced the form previously in use--
a blank sheet of paper. U.N. appeals for
international equipment donations for the police
program have gone unheeded. Of necessity, the
emphasis has been on low-technology,
labor-intensive efforts such as Community Watch to
deal with a growing crime problem. 

Planning police operations

While civilian police in emerging democracies
should be separated from the military, Professor
Bayley was correct in pointing out that
international police operations require a degree
of planning equal to if not greater than
international military operations, and that the
U.N. Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
is ill equipped to perform this function. As many
speakers noted during the U.N. seminar referred to
earlier, the CIVPOL office in DPKO is extremely
understaffed (there is only one U.N.-funded
position) and overwhelmed by its "mission
impossible" of managing eight police operations.
Seminar speakers noted that DPKO has no police
planners and police officers have been excluded
from assessment missions. This is a problem that
should be solved now by member states requiring
that the United Nations create and fund positions
for the CIVPOL office in DPKO. The first task of
these new police officers would be to develop a
generic plan for police operations. The plan would
serve as a template for future operations,
providing an overall framework that could be
modified in response to local conditions. 

It is also time to address our own shortcomings in
managing U.S. participation in international
police operations. With some 18,000 independent
police departments, the United States has no
national police force to provide expertise and
personnel. Instead, responsibility for policy
formulation, organization, implementation,
funding, and training for international police
operations--including the raising of U.S.
contingents--is divided among the National
Security Council, three Federal Government
departments, a large number of bureaus and
offices, and several civilian contractors. This
situation is awkward at best and costly and
confusing at worst. In my view, there is a need to
identify one Federal department in which a single
office would be fully responsible for managing and
funding all aspects of U.S. participation in
international police operations. This unit would
be staffed by law enforcement professionals and
diplomats with experience in handling
international police operations. With our own
house in order, the United States would be better
able to work with Sweden, Canada, and other
countries concerned with improving CIVPOL
operations. 

Training for roles and missions

In my judgment, among the areas that require
attention is training for potential CIVPOL
officers, particularly training in how to perform
their roles and missions. The common experience of
CIVPOL personnel is that they arrive in country,
are sent to their stations, and then spend a good
deal of time trying to figure out what to do. The
5-day orientation that the United Nations provides
for IPTF in Bosnia is a start, but this needs to
be supplemented by training in the tasks CIVPOL
personnel are expected to perform. Such training
would require prior agreement among donor
countries on doctrine, standards, and procedures
for operating CIVPOL stations and performing basic
tasks. This would take time to work out, but it is
absolutely essential. In peace operations, CIVPOL
normally takes months to deploy and even longer to
become operational. By the time it is functioning
effectively, the initial period of the operation
is over, and the best chance for effecting change
is lost.

These recommendations for improving CIVPOL
performance are not expensive nor are they beyond
the capacity of the international community. It
would, however, take political will on the part of
concerned states to effect change. Attendees at
the U.N. seminar on the role of police in
peacekeeping indicated a strong interest in
improving CIVPOL performance. We should take
advantage of the current environment to see what
can be done.

-------------------------------

Practical Issues in Providing Policing Assistance
Abroad 

Michael Berkow

This workshop on civilian policing and
international peacekeeping was proposed as a way
to bring to the table some of the various
stakeholders in international policing ventures
and examine what the United States can and should
be doing in the international context. I have been
asked to speak to the practical: What are the
issues in the delivery of police development
assistance abroad, and how can we begin to address
them?

I offer my comments in the context of a "growth
industry": the United States' role in
international police assistance. That role has
grown tremendously since 1986, and it continues to
expand. Expansion covers all aspects of our
assistance and includes State Department aid
funneled through the International Criminal
Investigative Training Assistance Program
(ICITAP), State Department grants to various NGOs
in support of specific projects in selected
countries, and training and assistance provided by
the operational agencies overseas (i.e., the DEA,
FBI, and U.S. Customs Service). In all areas, the
U.S. Government is increasing its assistance to
law enforcement agencies in foreign countries. 

Although the U.S. role is a growth industry, we
are operating without either a vision or a
business plan. We are committing increased amounts
of money from myriad agencies and providers--and
we are doing it without agreement on the scope,
the intent, or the desired result, let alone any
coordination or any discussion about what it is
that the United States has to offer other
countries in the way of policing.[1] Moreover, many
of the key U.S. players do not agree on the
fundamental aspects of policing assistance or the
ways to deliver it. 

Situations calling for policing assistance 

Because of the lack of agreement, I want to start
with the basics--some definitions and specifics of
the different types of policing missions. Why is
it we commit ourselves to policing assistance
overseas, and what is it that we strive to do once
there?

Broadly speaking, there are two types of
situations in which the U.S. is providing police
assistance: transitional situations and what
experts call "complex humanitarian emergencies,"
or failed-states situations. While both have
separate and distinct characteristics, they are
not totally unconnected. Rather, they can occupy
different points on a continuum of policing. This
is especially true for complex humanitarian
emergencies: If the rescue mission is successful,
at some point the emergency will downgrade to a
transitional situation.

Transitional situations. Briefly, transitional
efforts involve aid and assistance to a country's
internal security forces (read "police") as they
move from one political system--communist,
socialist, whatever--to a democratic system based
on the rule of law. Professor Bayley suggests that
the two key features of democratic policing are
responsiveness and accountability. I would agree:
Democratic policing means the police are
responsive to the laws of the country and the
public--not a specific regime or government--and
they are held accountable for their actions as
measured against the laws of the state. 

Our efforts to assist police agencies in
transitional situations are going on around the
world but have recently been most prominent in
Latin America and in the Newly Independent States
(NIS) of the former Soviet Union, as well as in
Eastern European countries emerging from
totalitarian rule. 

The common elements of a state where transitional
assistance is being offered are:

--An existing, functioning government. 

--An existing, functioning police force of some
type. This police force does not have to be great
or even very effective. It only has to be one in
which people put on uniforms and go to work
charged with the mission of internal or public
security.

--The U.S. efforts generally aim to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the other
government's police force. Examples include
provision of training in Honduras to control auto
theft or in the Newly Independent States to
control money laundering. There may be a security
gap in these countries but there is not an absence
of security. We are not serving as the police nor
are we assuming responsibility for law
enforcement. Rather, we are strengthening the
local capacity that is already providing police
safety.

As I mentioned, this is both a growing arena and a
confused one. The money is being spread among a
variety of providers but the essential
coordination--what is the goal of our assistance--
is not as clear. For example, in 1997, the State
Department in its State and Local Law Enforcement
Programs provided more than $7 million for
initiatives ranging from Project Harmony (law
enforcement exchanges between Russia/Ukraine and
police departments in New England), to Florida
State University's exchange program and annual
seminar with the Czech Republic, to
Connect/US-Russia (a program focused on domestic
violence, with exchanges and conferences in Moscow
and Minnesota). These projects were in addition to
the ICITAP programs (also funded by the State
Department) and the work being done by the
operational agencies in various countries (for
example, $10,000 in crime scene photography
training provided by the FBI to Antigua or $20,000
in training provided by the ATF in Bolivia).

 Thus, the U.S. Government is throwing millions of
dollars into transitional policing efforts through
a variety of sources but without an overall game
plan or desired end state. What is lacking is an
analysis of the process of managing democratic
change abroad similar to the one Professor Bayley
conducted. This is especially true in regard to
consideration of what we ought to be helping to
create overseas or, as Professor Bayley put it,
"What is the substance of democratic policing that
we ought to be exporting?"

Complex humanitarian emergencies. But that is not
the primary topic here. We are focused on the more
critical and larger complex humanitarian
emergencies--the situations in which a true crisis
or disaster has occurred. These situations, while
not occurring frequently, tend to be much more
costly and require a more extensive U.S.
commitment than do the situations calling for
transitional assistance. And they tend to have a
much higher profile. 

We have to agree on what a "complex humanitarian
emergency" is. I would suggest that the best
definition is the one provided by Andrew Natsios,
who identified five characteristics that each of
these situations possesses with varying degrees of
intensity:[2]

--The most visible characteristic is civil
conflict, which is rooted in traditional ethnic,
tribal, or religious animosities.

--The authority of the national government
deteriorates to such an extent that public
services disappear and political control over the
country passes elsewhere; for example, to regional
centers of power or warlords. 

--Mass population movements occur because
internally displaced people and refugees want to
escape conflict or search for food.

--The economic system suffers massive
dislocation.

--Food security declines, a situation to which
the first four characteristics contribute.

I cannot say it better than Natsios, who wrote,
"Communal violence is not only the most common of
the five characteristics, but frequently the
earliest sequentially." 

Thus, in these complex humanitarian emergencies,
the key common element is the absence of a safe
and secure environment. This creates an immediate
problem in the attempt to create a democratic
police force. As Professor Bayley pointed out in
his paper, "Reform of governmental institutions
cannot take place unless there is a stable
political center. Unstable governments rarely
create democratic police forces." 

Policing and other assistance in complex
emergencies

The number of complex humanitarian emergencies is
growing, and the U.S. response now includes police
assistance almost as a matter of course. The past
10 years have seen a number of these major
assistance efforts, starting with Panama in 1989
and continuing with El Salvador, Somalia, Haiti,
and Liberia--and then Bosnia, which bears elements
of both a failed state and a transitional effort.

Defining the role. In each crisis, we must
consider the nature of the policing role that the
international community is playing. Are we
entering the country to assume the law enforcement
function (true operational responsibility) or are
we expected to provide assistance to other
entities--local entities--that will then undertake
the policing chores. In each of the recent
large-scale complex humanitarian emergencies that
has included a U.S. policing response, our role
has been different.

In Somalia, the international community program
(and especially the U.S. Government program)
consisted strictly of training, assistance, and
infrastructure. There was no operational staff,
and the U.N. CIVPOL contingent was neither
equipped nor staffed for law enforcement
operations. In contrast, in the early stages of
the Haiti intervention, there was significant
assumption of responsibility for delivery of law
enforcement services by the international
community, including certain aspects of the U.S.
assistance. With Bosnia, CIVPOL has returned to
the training/assistance role rather than the
provision of law enforcement services. 

There are substantial differences between the two
roles--provider of law enforcement services and
provider of training and other transitional
assistance. We need to be explicit at the outset
about what role the international police are to
assume, and we need to avoid having our assistance
efforts play roles in which they cannot succeed. 

Progression to the transitional stage. I would
suggest that in a perfect world, a complex
emergency should serve merely as the starting
point on a continuum that leads to the
transitional side of the equation. If done well,
any response to a complex emergency should result,
ultimately, in transitional assistance as the host
country moves out of the crisis stage.

El Salvador and Panama are key examples of this
progression. Initially, both countries had no
functioning police/internal security force; both
had experienced a major change in political system
and direction; and in both there were major U.S.
interests at stake and hence U.S. commitments. In
both countries, our initial efforts were aimed at
establishing an interim security force and then
moving to fill the security gap long-term.
Finally, in both countries, over time, our effort
has shifted from the creation and support of a new
internal police force to efforts that enhance,
strengthen, and realign the force. 

Perspective of the military 

My key point in addressing these various roles is
that at the outset of any response to a complex
emergency, the end result must be kept in mind. We
cannot simply focus on the short-term issue of the
security gap at the onset of the problem or,
alternatively, at the onset of U.S. entry into the
problem area. 

A number of "fundamental truths" (or "hard
truths") derive from considering the onset of our
involvement:

--The military drives these major interventions
at the outset. The Department of Defense is the
major player here and the Department of Justice
has tended to be a bit player in the planning and
initial execution. 

--That first fundamental, or hard truth, has
proven very problematic for my second hard truth:
the military views civilian policing as an exit
strategy and hence does everything in its power to
accelerate effective civilian policing's
arrival/operation. 

Within that second truth several key points are
hidden:

--The military does not "do" civilian policing
or internal security. There may well be a security
gap on the ground, but traditionally the U.S.
military does not want to fill it, even in the
short run. This causes a variety of problems
depending on the specific situation. For example,
in Haiti it was a problem until the interim force
had been trained.

Indeed, the primary reason for the creation of an
interim public security force was to fill this
initial "security gap." Part of the former Haitian
military was recycled into this force because
there was no one else to fill the void. The U.S.
military, although ultimately providing
significant assistance to the interim force,
wanted to avoid the public safety mission. In
Somalia, day-to-day public safety was a constant
problem because of the extreme level of violence
coupled with the type of weapons and their numbers
throughout the country.

--Civilian policing is not the same as creating
a military force. This fact tends to be ignored.
Civilian policing takes longer. It requires key
agreements with political elements of the host
government, the civilians, and others. If they are
developed well, these agreements provide the
foundation for enduring change. The need for
speed, however, can prevent them from developing
as needed.

From the outset, a public security force is
engaged in its primary mission. As the members of
the force graduate from training and are deployed,
they are "in action." In contrast, when a military
operation is set up in a foreign country, rarely
is the new military pressed into immediate
operation. Generally, it is standing by, ready to
go to work as needed. Thus, the new policing
organization has no time for rigorous training,
testing, "shakeouts," practice missions, and the
like. It goes to work and the mistakes it makes
during early development are seen as failures. To
be convinced of this, one only has to read the
early reports of the newly created Haitian police
force.

Vastly divergent views. Let me share a short story
that illustrates these different perspectives.[3] It
involves a writing assignment in which university
students were asked to pair off and work
cooperatively to construct a short story. The
purpose was to teach the students something about
the importance of consistent plot and
characterization. A woman and a man paired up,
with the following result: 

Woman: Eleanor sat with her legs curled under her.
As she watched her teabag steeping, her mind
drifted to thoughts of Peter. Could relationships
really be this difficult? Was it really as arduous
a task to know the soul and heart of another as it
now seemed?

Man: Meanwhile, out in the cosmos, unknown to
Eleanor, on the planet of Zorgan, the evil
Zorgonians were planning an assault on the earth
that would render Eleanor's interpersonal
difficulties insignificant. For, in a few moments,
Eleanor, Peter, and all the other luckless
inhabitants of their fair city would be vaporized
along with the other hapless earthlings.

Woman: Fortunately, in Eleanor's travels as an
astronaut, she had befriended the Zorgonians and,
using her special satellite hookup to Zorgan, she
brokered a peace treaty just moments before the
earth was to be obliterated. The Zorgonian space
crafts returned to their planet, happy and content
that they now could live peacefully with their
sisters and brothers on earth.

Man: Unfortunately, the Zorgonians were not to be
trusted. After making a loop around the earth's
moon, they hid on the dark side, planning their
merciless surprise attack.

Woman: I can't continue this. It is a mockery of
literature . . . and you are an insensitive, macho
jerk.

Man: And you are a neurotic, self-absorbed,
narcissistic navel gazer.

Woman: Jerk!

Man: Idiot!

And so forth. The nature of the communication
between civilian police and the military often
resembles this scenario. We do not speak each
other's language; nor have we created the
necessary interface between our senior military
command and our policing institutions. The
creation of police forces in certain foreign
cultures is new, and we are struggling to get a
handle on it. We are just beginning to establish
the requisite studies and baseline requirements.
More importantly, we are wrestling with the
questions that Professor Bayley has focused on:
What are the distinguishing features of democratic
policing and how can we "export" them? The
civilian policing side of the equation is working
to establish its protocol and, as it does so, it
must convince the military of the legitimacy of
its operating style. 

This dichotomy of focus takes us back to my story:
the woman wanted to write about relationships; the
man, about action and war. The two do not fit
together. The civilian police development experts
are thinking about what will happen down the road
and envisioning the transitional phase; the
military is thinking, "When do we get out of this
peacekeeping role and get back to our primary
mission?"

No ready forces for deployment 

Another hard truth about these missions is that on
the civilian police side, two key elements are
required: personnel and logistics. Civilian police
have neither ready for immediate deployment; we
lack a surge capacity. A fundamental difference
with the military is that the police are actively
engaged in their primary mission. The military, in
contrast, is training, preparing, and standing
ready for their primary mission--war (national
defense). Every police officer removed from the
street of any city or town is removed from active
engagement. In the military, this would be the
equivalent of taking soldiers from the battlefield
in the midst of an engagement and sending them
elsewhere. Our towns and cities are our
battlefields, and police officers are our soldiers.
We simply do not have personnel who are not
engaged. The transfer of any personnel to foreign
duty is a diminution of effort at a time when the
Federal Government, among others, has tried to
increase the numbers of "cops/soldiers" in the
battle. Just consider the billions of dollars
provided by the Federal Government to the Office
of Community Oriented Policing Services for hiring
100,000 police officers. The goal was to get more
officers in the field in the United States, not to
provide them for overseas missions. 

We do not even have a single pool of police to
draw from--we have no national police force and
thus no trained cadre ready for deployment.
Rather, we have to implore the chiefs of more than
17,000 agencies to give us personnel on "loan," or
we hire retired officers. 

These are critical issues that have not been
resolved. In Haiti, for the first time, the United
States committed to provide personnel for the
CIVPOL force tasked with actual operational law
enforcement responsibilities. Yet there was (and
is) no system to obtain the appropriate staffing
for these positions. This situation was repeated
in Bosnia: We obtained officers from a variety of
locales across the country on short-term
assignments. 

Police lack support systems. Civilian policing
also lacks the logistical support to respond to
these situations. The police do not have the field
kitchens, and the water systems, and the portable
buildings that the military have. The police do
not have transport capacity for movement to
remote, hostile locations around the world. Yet
most of the major policing missions have been in
exactly these types of locales. In the absence of
developing an independent logistical support
system, the police need the help and support of
the military. They need to be viewed as a critical
element of the force package, not an add on or a
burden.

Criminal justice operations

Finally, both the police and the military tend to
forget another hard truth: The police are merely
one part of a criminal justice system. You need
prosecutors, judges, and prisons to complete the
system. In every mission we have been involved in
we forgot, ignored, or did not deal with this
problem at the outset. It is only after we start
policing operations--start arresting people--that
we stop and say, "Oops! We need some judges, some
prosecutors, and some jails." Our failure to think
of the operations as requiring a criminal justice
"system" creates serious problems in executing the
support activities. 

Part of this is extremely unfair to the military.
In the worst situations, it is the military that
is first on the ground. It is the military that
must deal with people who are imprisoned, many
times unjustly, in horrific conditions. In Haiti,
it was courageous and thoughtful military officers
who dealt with the people imprisoned there. The
same was true in Somalia. 

Implications for future operations

In thinking about and improving future civilian
policing operations, we might consider the
following: 

--Encouraging the police and the military to
better understand each other's systems and
capabilities. The military needs to learn
something about civilian policing and vice versa. 

--Developing a better sense of who we need and
when we need them in an operation, based on a hard
assessment of the on-the-ground reality. Do we
need regular civilian police? Do we need
paramilitary civilian police like the CarabiniŠre?
Do we have the logistical support we need?

--Determining at the outset the specific role of
the international police--support, training and
assistance, or actual law enforcement operations--
and providing appropriate staff and equipment.

--Developing the capacity to bring the systems
into play--prisons at the outset and
prosecutors/judges/courts shortly after the police
are operational.

--Ensuring that the political will is there--
both in the United States and in the host country-
-to carry out the ultimate mission.

As I noted, civilian policing in this context is a
growth industry. Just as the military has truly
"gone to school" on peacekeeping missions amid a
recognition that they will be increasingly
frequent, so too will the police need to work on
their response to international peacekeeping
missions as an integral, timely, effective part of
the force package. Civilian policing has a large
and growing role in these endeavors, one that we
must "get right."

-------------------------------

Notes

1. This last point is addressed very effectively
by Professor Bayley in his paper.

2. Natsios, Andrew, "U.S. Foreign Policy and the
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse: Humanitarian
Relief in Complex Emergencies," The Washington
Papers, Vol. 170, New York: Praeger Publishers,
1997. 

3. I would like to thank Dr. Steven Vicchio for
"lending" me this story.

-------------------------------

Participants' Comments--A Summary 

Problems in the makeup of the international
civilian police force

Workshop participants believe the experience in
Bosnia has underscored the need for a more
effective international civilian police
infrastructure to organize, direct, and maintain
standards for international civilian police
deployments. As the Bosnia operation has
demonstrated, the 30-plus participating countries
that contributed police "monitors" did not
universally subscribe to a common recruitment
standard, and as a result it was not uncommon for
unqualified personnel to be deployed to the
operation. This necessitated the establishment of
a time-consuming vetting process. In addition to
language difficulties (English was the official
language of the mission), some recruits could not
meet minimum standards for policing, such as the
ability to drive a car. Further complicating
factors, according to the workshop participants,
include the differing political agendas of some
contributing nations, the limited material and
financial resources available to some contingents,
and time constraints that affected the ability to
fully train personnel. 

Military and civilian police functions

Panama and Haiti presented different challenges,
according to workshop participants. In both
instances, at the time of intervention, primary
police functions were carried out by corrupt,
poorly supervised police agencies, which has
sometimes been the case in parts of Latin America
and Africa. In many cases, policing institutions,
frequently in collaboration with the military,
were directly protecting and sustaining the
undemocratic ruling elites. 

Privatization of the police 

In growing proportions both in the United States
and elsewhere, private security agencies and other
nontraditional policing institutions are promoting
public safety in societies threatened by crime. In
South Africa, Liberia, and a number of other
countries, some staff in these private
organizations originally were trained by public
police agencies. Defections from public police
agencies for higher pay in the private sector may
weaken the performance of public police. The
proliferation of private police may also fragment
spans of control and weaken the perceived
legitimacy of regular civilian police.
Participants felt that while private police may
contribute to a higher level of law and order, at
least in some areas, they may also contribute to
diminished authority of the public police and, by
extension, already fragile governing institutions. 

Technology

In many complex emergency situations, police needs
are frequently at the low end of the technology
spectrum. Haiti in the period 1994 to 1996 was
cited by participants as a classic example. With
the removal of the military establishment and
creation of a national civilian police force, the
basic support requirement was for uniforms;
vehicles; radios (the police have few telephones);
and riot control gear such as shields, batons, and
other basic equipment. 

Advanced technology could not be used effectively
in the emergent police force, and when it was, it
was frequently not cost-effective. For rural
police, for example, horses and bicycles were
preferable to motor vehicles. Because of the
difficulty of maintaining vehicles in less
developed areas of the world, and because of the
poor state of the roads in many rural areas in
those countries, motor vehicles are frequently not
the best way to provide local police with reliable
transport to reach the bulk of the population. 

Postoperation diagnosis

Several participants voiced concern about the
absence of a centralized U.S. authority to monitor
performance and measure outcomes to create
effective and responsive local police abroad. The
U.S. military's "lessons learned" process is
exceptionally valuable in capturing useful
knowledge from past U.S. military operations.
However, these participants say there is no system
that can provide comparable information for
nonmilitary operations. They cited legislative
constraints as part of the reason, and the absence
of central oversight authority within the
executive branch of the U.S. Government as another
part. They felt serious consideration should be
given to corrective legislation, but pending that
development, some additional analysis and
evaluation capability could be introduced.

The justice triad 

Participants noted that a one-dimensional approach
relying primarily or exclusively on postcrisis
development of the police will invariably fail if
two other institutional requirements--development
of an independent judiciary and development of an
effective penal system--are not met. Frequently,
priority is given by the intervening international
community to civilian police reform, with penal
and judicial matters treated as marginal issues.
For example, the failure of the Somali police,
despite their best intentions, is partially
attributable to the absence of the penal and
judicial "legs" in the justice triad. According to
workshop participants, there were comparable
shortcomings in contemporary Haiti and Bosnia.
Contributing to this absence of a balanced triad
are the personnel and institutional gaps in the
international agencies and governments responsible
for the intervention.

Strategic and operational integration

In many complex emergency and humanitarian
assistance situations, the United States and
various international agencies must likely deal
with a mix of failed governments and collapsed
institutions. Security for the intervening forces,
or "force protection," will compete for resources
needed to provide extensive and abundant
humanitarian relief. It can be expected in the
initial phase of operations that military
peacekeeping forces will be present, along with
civilian U.N. assets, nongovernmental and
international organizations and, perhaps,
indigenous resources and personnel. This
collection of assets, capabilities, interests,
agendas, and programs must be coordinated and
priorities established. This in turn requires some
measure of strategic planning to determine the
roles and missions of participants, including
those of international civilian police.
Concomitantly, the establishment of an effective
multinational police force requires that agreement
on standardized street-level and patrol procedures
be reached by all contributing national police
forces. Establishing this coordination at both the
strategic and the tactical level will prove to be
the challenge.

-------------------------------

Compendium of Participants' Views 

"Police skills are fundamentally different from
those that we train our soldiers in."
Robert E. Houdek

"Police can undermine democracy and they can
reinforce it, but they cannot create it." 
David H. Bayley

"One of the things we need in Washington is what I
refer to as the 'center of gravity' in terms of
centralizing and coordinating our [international
policing] activities."
William Lewis

"This business of 'feudalization' of private law
enforcement is an amazing phenomenon. And it's
really making life a lot more difficult for us." 
Robert Perito

"The only tradition that exists in policing in
many countries is the military one. . . . But you
have got to tell them that policing is not a war.
Policing is something else."
Rachel Neild

"The police in Bosnia are not going to change
until the entire criminal justice system has moved
in the right direction."
Bob Edwards

"I think we need to be careful about simply
assuming that, for example, community policing
works well in Prince George's County [in the
United States]; therefore, we will send it to
Bosnia and do it over there."
Chuck Wexler

-------------------------------

Appendix A: Workshop Agenda 

9 a.m. 
Welcome and Introduction

Mark Sakaley, Acting Director
National Institute of Justice International Center 

Joe Montville, Director, Preventive Diplomacy
Program Center for Strategic and International
Studies 

Dr. Chuck Wexler, Executive Director
Police Executive Research Forum

9:15 a.m.
Opening Remarks: "Cops and Crises"

Ambassador Robert E. Houdek, Adviser to USAID
Greater Horn of Africa Initiative and former
Ambassador to Eritrea and Uganda 
     
9:30 a.m.
Keynote: "The Contemporary
Practices of Policing: A Comparative View"

Dr. David H. Bayley, Dean, School of Criminal
Justice State, University of New York at Albany 

10:30 a.m.
Responses to Keynote and Group Discussion 

Moderator: Dr. William Lewis, Professor
Emeritus, George Washington University

Donna Hansen, Former Chief, Fort Myers
[Florida] Police Department; Former Chief,
Support Unit, International Police Task
Force, United Nations, Zagreb, Croatia

Robert Perito, Deputy Director, International
Criminal Investigative Training Assistance
Program (ICITAP), U.S. Department of Justice

Rachel Neild, Senior Associate, Washington
Office on Latin America

12 noon
Lunch and Presentation: "Is There
International Police Power? The Legal Basis
for International Intervention"

Introduction: James Burack, Counsel, Police
Executive Research Forum
     
Colonel F.M. Lorenz, U.S. Marine Corps,
Industrial College of the Armed
Forces, National Defense University

1 p.m.
Discussion: "Civilian Policing--Across the
Spectrum of Crisis"
     
Moderator: Ambassador Edward Marks (ret.)
     
Michael Berkow, Chief, South Pasadena
[California] Police Department Former Police
Project Manager in Somalia and Haiti for
ICITAP, U.S. Department of Justice

Colonel Larry Forster, U.S. Army Director,
U.S. Army Peacekeeping Institute

Colonel Michael J. Dziedzic, U.S. Air
Force Institute for National Strategic Studies 
National Defense University
     
2:15 p.m.
Adjournment
          
------------------------------- 

Appendix B: Biographies of Presenters 

David Bayley is dean and professor in the
School of Criminal Justice, State University
of New York at Albany. A specialist in
international criminal justice with a
particular interest in policing, he has
conducted extensive research in India, Japan,
Australia, Canada, Britain, Singapore, and
the United States. Professor Bayley's
research on policing has focused on
strategies of policing, the evolution of
police organizations, organizational reform,
accountability, and the tactics of patrol
officers in discretionary law enforcement
situations. Recently he served as a
consultant to the U.S. Government and the
United Nations on police reform in Bosnia.
His most recent book, Police for the Future,
is based on field research in Australia,
Canada, Great Britain, Japan, and the United
States. Professor Bayley holds a B.A. degree
from Denison University, an M.A. degree from
Oxford University, and a Ph.D. from
Princeton.
     
Michael Berkow is the police chief of
Coachella, California. He served previously
as Police Project Manager in Somalia and
Haiti for the International Criminal
Investigative Training Assistance Program of
the U.S. Department of Justice. In the
missions to both countries he was responsible
for creating police academies, providing
technical assistance, and helping to
establish local civilian police forces. He
spent 13 years with the Rochester [New York]
Police Department, leaving with the rank of
lieutenant. He was an adjunct professor at
the State University of New York-Brockport
and taught at a number of police academies
and other institutions, including the
Connecticut State Police Academy, the Orlando
[Florida] Police Academy, and Northwestern
University. Chief Berkow received a
bachelor's degree from Kalamazoo College in
arts, sociology, and public policy; and a
J.D. from Syracuse University. He also is a
graduate of the FBI National Academy. 

James Burack is Counsel with the Police
Executive Research Forum. He participated in
two U.S. State Department projects related to
the United Nations International Police Task
Force (IPTF) in Bosnia, including working on
recruitment and selection issues for the U.S.
contingent, managing technical assistance
provided to the IPTF, and serving briefly
with the IPTF planning staff in Sarajevo.
Before assuming a position with PERF, he was
a Marine Corps judge advocate and served as a
Special Assistant U.S. Attorney. He is
currently serving as a civil affairs officer
in the Marine Corps Reserve. Mr. Burack was a
patrol officer with the Westminster
[Colorado] Police Department for 4 years and
graduated from the Senior Management
Institute for Police. He received an A.B.
degree in government and history from
Dartmouth College and a J.D. degree from the
University of Colorado. 
     
Michael Dziedzic is currently a senior
military fellow at the Institute for National
Strategic Studies, where his principal issue
areas are peace operations and security
affairs in the Western Hemisphere.
Previously, he was a member of the faculty at
the National War College. He also served as
air attache in El Salvador from 1992 to 1994,
during the implementation of the peace
accords. Before that posting, he was a
political-military planner in the Western
Hemisphere Division of the Air Staff (1992),
a tenured professor in the Department of
Political Science of the U.S. Air Force
Academy (1988 to 1991), and a visiting fellow
at the International Institute for Strategic
Studies in London (1987 to 88). His writings
include Mexico: Converging Challenges and a
number of articles on Mexican defense policy,
the transnational drug trade, hemispheric
security matters, and current U.S. peace
operations. 
     
Larry Forster is director of the U.S. Army
Peacekeeping Institute. Colonel Forster has
been commander of the Military Coordination
Center in Zakho, Iraq; Provost Marshal/Force
Protection Officer in Operation PROVIDE
COMFORT, Rwanda; and a U.N. military observer
in the Sinai and Lebanon. As a Military
Police (MP) officer, he was chief of MP
operations for U.S. Army Europe; Commander of
the 701 MP Battalion; Director of Law
Enforcement/Commander of the 291 MP Company,
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama; Provost Marshal of
the Yakima Firing Center; and Provost
Marshal, Pleiku Province, Vietnam. From 1995
to 1996 he was a fellow at the Harvard Center
of International Affairs and taught history
at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point.
Colonel Forster earned an M.A. degree in
criminal justice from John Jay College of
Criminal Justice and an M.A. degree in
history from the University of California,
Davis. He also is a 1988 graduate of the FBI
National Academy.

Donna Hansen, a consultant in criminal
justice, recently returned from a 1-year
assignment in the former Yugoslavia, where
she served as chief of the U.N. Support Unit.
In that capacity she was responsible for the
training and rotation of more than 2,000
international civilian police who monitored
the activities of local police in three U.N.
missions. Ms. Hansen's law enforcement career
includes 4 years as the chief of police for
the City of Fort Myers, Florida, and 21 years
with the Metro-Dade Police Department, Miami,
Florida. Ms. Hansen holds an M.A. degree from
Florida International University and is a
graduate of the Southern Police Institute
Senior Management Program.

Robert E. Houdek is an adviser to the USAID
Greater Horn of Africa Initiative and former
U.S. ambassador to Eritrea and Uganda.
Ambassador Houdek returned to the United
States in 1996 to assume his current position
after having served 3 years as the first U.S.
ambassador to Eritrea. Before his posting
there, he served as the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for African Affairs, U.S.
Department of State. Ambassador Houdek has
served in Belgium, Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Jamaica, Kenya, Uganda, and Ethiopia. In
1991, he was awarded the President's
Exceptional Service medal for his role in
evacuating Ethiopian Jews to Israel in the
last days of the Ethiopian civil war. In 1997
Ambassador Houdek was on special assignment
in Eastern Zaire, where he served as a
negotiator and liaison officer for an AID
Disaster Assistance Response Team that was
assisting in the evacuation of Rwandan
refugees and the resettlement of Congolese
people internally displaced by the civil war.

William Lewis is professor emeritus in
political science and international relations
at George Washington University, where he
taught from 1978 to 1994. He was the founder
and director of the Security Studies Program
and was a visiting professor at the
University of Michigan and Georgetown
University. In addition to having served as
Deputy Undersecretary of State for Security
Assistance, U.S. Department of State, he was
assigned to the policy planning staff in the
Office of the Secretary of Defense, the
Presidential Task Force on Foreign Aid, and
the State-Defense Departments strategy
planning group. He currently provides
consulting services to several government and
research institutions, including the U.S.
Departments of State and Defense, the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, Science
Applications, Inc., and CSIS. He is a
graduate of Johns Hopkins University and
received a doctorate from The American
University.

Frederick M. Lorenz is a colonel in the U.S.
Marine Corps. He currently occupies the
Marine Chair at the Industrial College of the
Armed Forces, National Defense University. He
served as the senior legal adviser in Somalia
for Operation Restore Hope from 1992 to 1993
and for United Shield in 1995, and was on the
legal staff of Operation Joint Endeavor in
Sarajevo in early 1996. Colonel Lorenz has
lectured and written widely on operational
law issues such as the rules of engagement
and the use of force in peacekeeping
operations. As a Marine judge advocate, he
has held a wide variety of positions,
including prosecutor, defense counsel,
military judge, and rifle company commander.
Additional assignments, focusing on
environmental law issues, led to his current
research on international environmental
security. Colonel Lorenz received his
undergraduate and law degrees from Marquette
University and a Master of Law degree from
George Washington University. 

Edward Marks retired in 1995 from the U.S.
Foreign Service with the rank of
Minister-Counselor in the Senior Foreign
Service. His most recent assignments were as
Visiting Senior Fellow at the Institute for
National Strategic Studies (INSS) at the
National Defense University, Deputy U.S.
Representative to the Economic and Social
Council of the United Nations, Deputy Chief
of Mission in Sri Lanka and the Republic of
Maldives, Senior Visiting Fellow at CSIS,
Deputy Director of the Office for Combating
Terrorism and Emergency Planning, and
Ambassador to Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde.
Ambassador Marks continues to provide
consulting services to INSS; CSIS; Booz,
Allen and Hamilton; Cubic International; and
the U.N. Development Fund. He received his
bachelor's degree from the University of
Michigan and his master's degree from the
University of Oklahoma. He is also a graduate
of the Foreign Service Institute and the
National War College. Ambassador Marks has
taught at New York University and served in
the U.S. Army.

Joe Montville is the Director of CSIS's
Preventive Diplomacy Program, which
specializes in community-building and support
of peacemaking in countries affected by
serious ethnic conflict. Mr. Montville was a
career diplomat, serving in Iraq, Lebanon,
Libya, and Morocco. He spent a year in Egypt
as a Fulbright Scholar. At the State
Department, Mr. Montville was regional policy
adviser in the Bureau of Near Eastern and
South Asian Affairs and was Near East
Division Chief and Director, Office of Global
Issues, in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research. He also was research director at
the Center for the Study of Foreign Affairs
at the Foreign Service Institute. Mr.
Montville has been a consultant to the
Department of Defense and currently cochairs
a State Department open forum working group
on conflict resolution, civil society, and
democracy. During the past 15 years, Mr.
Montville has been developing expertise in
and writing about cultural diversity and
ethnic conflict resolution theory and
practice. His field work has included South
Africa, Slovakia, Serbia, Slovenia, Croatia,
Northern Ireland, Russia, the Baltic
countries, Romania, Hungary, Cyprus, and the
Middle East. A founding member of the
International Society of Political
Psychology, Mr. Montville is also author and
editor of Conflict and Peacemaking in
Multiethnic Societies and coeditor of The
Psychodynamics of International
Relationships. He holds faculty appointments
at the Center for the Study of Mind and Human
Interaction at the University of Virginia
Medical School and, as a lecturer on
psychiatry, at the Harvard Medical School.
Mr. Montville graduated from Lehigh
University and did graduate work at Harvard
and Columbia Universities.

Rachel M. Neild is a Senior Associate with
the Washington Office on Latin America
(WOLA), a nonprofit organization that
promotes international and national policies
to advance human rights, democracy, and
social and economic justice in Latin America
and the Caribbean. Ms. Neild is responsible
for WOLA's work on comparative issues in
police reform in Haiti and edits Enlace, a
quarterly Spanish-language bulletin. She has
published numerous papers and two major
reports on police reform in Haiti and edited
"Demilitarizing Public Order; the
International Community, Police Reform and
Human Rights in Central America and Haiti."
She also has written reports on human rights
training programs of the U.S. military and on
human rights and democratization issues in
Chile and Paraguay. Ms. Neild has a master's
degree in international affairs from the
University of Colombia, and a bachelors'
degree in philosophy and literature from the
University of Manchester. She previously
worked with the Comision Andina de Juristas
in Lima, Peru; the Inter-American Institute
for Human Rights in San Jose, Costa Rica; and
Americas Watch [now Human Rights
Watch/Americas] in Washington, D.C., and New
York.

Robert Perito is Deputy Director of the
International Criminal Investigative Training
Assistance Program (ICITAP), U.S. Department
of Justice. He is retired from the State
Department, where he served in numerous
diplomatic posts around the world. 

Chuck Wexler is the Executive Director of the
Police Executive Research Forum. He
previously worked for the Boston Police
Department, where he helped develop and
manage the community disorders unit, which
earned a national reputation as a model for
the investigation and prosecution of racially
motivated crime. He also headed the
professional development division for the
International Association of Chiefs of
Police. In addition, he served as special
assistant to the Nation's first "drug czar,"
managed a national project for the
President's Drug Advisory Council, and worked
for the Partnership for a Drug-Free America,
where he collaborated with major corporations
on the drug-free workplace initiative. Dr.
Wexler earned a bachelor's degree from Boston
University, a master's degree in criminology
from Florida State University, and a
doctorate in urban studies and planning from
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
     
-------------------------------     
     
Appendix C: Workshop Attendees
     
Professor David Bayley
Dean, School of Criminal Justice
State University of New York at Albany
135 Western Avenue
Albany, NY 12222
518-442-5214
518-442-5212 (Fax)

Chief Michael Berkow
South Pasadena Police Department
1422 Mission Street
South Pasadena, CA 91030 
818-799-1121
818-441-3985 (Fax)
mjberkow@earthlink.net

Mr. Anne Willem Bijleveld
Representative, United Nations
High Commissioner on Refugees
1775 K Street N.W., Suite 300
Washington, DC 20006
202-296-5191
202-296-5660 (Fax)
usa.wa@unhr.ch

Mr. Jim Burack
Counsel
Police Executive Research Forum 
1120 Connecticut Avenue N.W., Suite 930
Washington, DC 20036 
202-466-7820
202-466-7826 (Fax)
jburack@PoliceForum.org

Mr. Ray Dalland
International Security and Peacekeeping
Bureau of Political and Military Affairs
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20520
202-736-7747
202-647-4055 (Fax) 

Colonel Michael Dziedic
Institute for National Strategic Studies
National Defense University
Fort McNair S.W.
Washington, DC 20319-6000
202-685-2220

Ms. Wendy Eaton
Defense Forecasting, Inc.
21 Dupont Circle N.W.
Washington, DC 20036
202-785-9041

Mr. Bob Edwards
943 Jennifer Street
Incline Village, NV 89451
702-832-7181
702-832-7191 (Fax)

Mr. Steven Edwards 
Program Manager
Office of Research and Evaluation
National Institute of Justice
U.S. Department of Justice
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington DC 20005
202-307-0500
202-307-6394 (Fax)

Colonel Larry Forster
Director
U.S. Army Peacekeeping Institute
Army War College
Carlisle, PA 17013-5050
717-245-3740
717-245-3279 (Fax)
forsterl@csl-emh1.army.mil

Mr. Eliot M. Goldberg
National Defense University
Fort McNair, Bldg. 62 S.W.
300 Fifth Avenue
Washington, DC 20319-5066
202-685-2375
202-685-3972 (Fax)
goldberge@ndu.edu

Ms. Donna Hansen
P.O. Box 247
Ft. Myers, FL 33902 
hansup@worldnet.att.net

Mr. Glenn Hodes
Research Analyst
Overseas Development Council
1875 Connecticut Avenue N.W.
Washington, DC 20009
202-234-8701
202-245-0067 (Fax)
hodes@odc.org

Ambassador Robert E. Houdek
2030 Rhode Island Avenue 
McLean, VA 22101
703-534-4761
703-534-9170 (Fax)

Ms. Ruby Kahn
Center for Strategic and International
Studies
1800 K Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20036
202-775-3179
202-775-3199 (Fax)
rdk@csis.org

Mr. Robert J. Kaminski
Social Science Analyst
National Institute of Justice 
U.S. Department of Justice
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531
202-616-9135
202-307-6394 (Fax)
rkaminski@aol.com

Ms. Lorelei E. Kelly
Research Fellow
Stanford Center on Conflict and Negotiations
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-8610
650-723-2574
650-723-9421

Dr. William Lewis
Professor Emeritus
1101 S. Arlington Ridge Road, #307
Arlington, VA 22202
703-521-0881

Colonel Fred Lorenz, USMC
Industrial College of the Armed Forces
Fort McNair S.W.
Washington, DC 20319
202-685-4202
202-685-4175 (Fax)
lorenzf@ndu.edu

Ambassador Edward Marks (ret.)
2737 Devonshire Place N.W.
Washington, DC 20008
202-588-1632
edwardmarks@msn.com

Mr. Bill Maudlin
Administrator, International Programs
International Association of Chiefs of Police
515 Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
703-836-6767, ext. 325
703-836-4543 (Fax)

Mr. Sam McQuade
Social Science Program Manager
National Institute of Justice
U.S. Department of Justice 
810 Seventh Street N.W. 
Washington DC 20531
202-307-0200
202-307-6394 (Fax)

Ms. Johanna Mendelson
USAID/BHR/OTI
Room 5314A NS
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20523-0059
202-647-3990
202-647-0218 (Fax)

Mr. David C. Mitchell
Policy and Missions Office
Secretary of Defense
Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict
2500 Defense Pentagon, Room 2B525
Washington, DC 20301-2500
703-693-2897
703-693-0615 (Fax)
mitchellda@osd.pentagon.mil

Mr. Joe Montville
Director
Preventive Diplomacy Program
Center for Strategic and International
Studies 
1800 K Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20006
202-775-3277
202-775-3199 (Fax)
jvm@csis.org

Ms. Rachel Neild
Senior Associate
Washington Office on Latin America
400 C Street N.E.
Washington, DC 20002
202-544-8045

Ms. Diane Paul
Human Rights Watch
321 St. Dunstans Road
Baltimore, MD 21212
410-323-1055
410-435-8003 (Fax)
pauls@charm.net

Mr. Robert Perito
Deputy Director
International Criminal Investigative
Training Assistance Program 
U.S. Department of Justice
1331 F Street N.W., 5th Floor
Washington, DC 20004
202-305-4234
202-616-8429 (Fax)

Mr. Richard Rankin
Program Manager
BETAC International Corporation
2001 N. Beauregard Street
Suite 1100 
Alexandria, VA 22311
703-824-3207
703-825-3130 (Fax)

Mr. Mark Sakaley
Acting Director 
International Center
National Institute of Justice
U.S. Department of Justice
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531
202-305-2698
202-307-6394 (Fax)
sakaleym@usdoj.gov

Mr. Thomas Schiller
International Networking Liaison
National Criminal Justice Reference Service 
Aspen Systems Corporation
2277 Research Boulevard 
Rockville, MD 20850
202-305-1294
301-519-5932
301-519-5313 (Fax)
tschiller@ncjrs.org
schiller@ojp.usdoj.gov

Mr. Frank Severs
Assistant to Head of Delegation
International Committee of the Red Cross
2100 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W., Suite 545
Washington DC 20037
202-293-9430
303-293-9431 (Fax)

Lieutenant Colonel Louis Thompson
Senior Fellow
Atlantic Council
910 17th Street N.W., 10th Floor
Washington, DC 20006
202-778-4980
202-463-7240 (Fax)
lthompson@acgate.acus.org

Mr. J. Matthew Vaccaro
OAS S&R PK-HA
Peacekeeping and Humanitarian Affairs
U.S. Department of Defense
2900 Defense Pentagon
Washington, DC 20301-2900
703-614-0446
703-614-0442 (Fax)
jmvaccaro@aol.com

Ms. Heather Ward
Vera Institute of Justice
377 Broadway
New York, NY 10013
212-334-1300
212-941-9407 (Fax)
hward@vera.org

Colonel Kim Ward
Baltimore County Police Department
700 East Joppa Road
Towson, MD 21286
410-887-2206
410-887-4581 (Fax)
kimward@bellatlantic.net

Mr. Chuck Wexler
Executive Director
Police Executive Research Forum
1120 Connecticut Avenue N.W., Suite 930
Washington, DC 20036
202-66-7820
202-466-7826 (Fax)
cwexler@policeforum.org

Dr. Susan Woodward
Foreign Policy Studies
Brookings Institution
1771 Massachusetts Avenue N.W.
Washington, DC 20036
202-797-6092
202-797-6003 (Fax)
swoodward@brook.edu

Mr. Donald Zoufal
General Counsel
Chicago Police Department
111 South State Street, Suite 400
Chicago, IL 60605
312-747-7972
312-747-2430 (Fax) 

-------------------------------

About the National Institute of Justice

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ), a
component of the Office of Justice Programs,
is the research agency of the U.S. Department
of Justice. Created by the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as
amended, NIJ is authorized to support
research, evaluation, and demonstration
programs, development of technology, and both
national and international information
dissemination. Specific mandates of the Act
direct NIJ to: 

--Sponsor special projects and research and
development programs that will improve and
strengthen the criminal justice system and
reduce or prevent crime.

--Conduct national demonstration projects
that employ innovative or promising
approaches for improving criminal justice.

--Develop new technologies to fight crime
and improve criminal justice.

--Evaluate the effectiveness of criminal
justice programs and identify programs that
promise to be successful if continued or
repeated.

--Recommend actions that can be taken by
Federal, State, and local governments as well
as by private organizations to improve
criminal justice. 

--Carry out research on criminal behavior.

--Develop new methods of crime prevention
and reduction of crime and delinquency. 

In recent years, NIJ has greatly expanded its
initiatives, the result of the Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (the
Crime Act), partnerships with other Federal
agencies and private foundations, advances in
technology, and a new international focus.
Some examples of these new initiatives: 

--Exploring key issues in community
policing, violence against women, violence
within the family, sentencing reforms, and
specialized courts such as drug courts.

--Developing dual-use technologies to
support national defense and local law
enforcement needs.

--Establishing four regional National Law
Enforcement and Corrections Technology
Centers and a Border Research and Technology
Center. 

--Strengthening NIJ's links with the
international community through participation
in the United Nations network of
criminological institutes, the U.N. Criminal
Justice Information Network, UNOJUST (United
Nations Online Justice Clearinghouse), and
the NIJ International Center.

--Improving the online capability of NIJ's
criminal justice information clearinghouse. 

--Establishing the ADAM (Arrestee Drug
Abuse Monitoring) program--formerly the Drug
Use Forecasting (DUF) program--to increase
the number of drug-testing sites and study
drug-related crime.

The Institute Director establishes the
Institute's objectives, guided by the
priorities of the Office of Justice Programs,
the Department of Justice, and the needs of
the criminal justice field. The Institute
actively solicits the views of criminal
justice professionals and researchers in the
continuing search for answers that inform
public policymaking in crime and justice. 

-------------------------------

To find out more information about the
National Institute of Justice, please contact:

National Criminal Justice Reference Service, 
Box 6000 
Rockville, MD 20849-6000
800-851-3420
e-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org

To obtain an electronic version of this document,
access the NIJ Web site 
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij).

If you have questions, call or e-mail NCJRS.
