*This is an archive page. The links are no longer being updated. 
1994.12.12 :  Increase in Drug-Related Emergency Room Cases

Contact:  Pat El-Hinnawy   (301) 443-8956
December 12, 1994

           DRUG-RELATED EMERGENCY ROOM CASES UP NATIONALLY

     The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
today released data showing an 8 percent overall increase in drug-
related emergency room cases from 1992 to 1993.

     The data from DAWN -- the Drug Abuse Warning Network -- showed
no significant changes in several categories including cocaine-
related emergency visits, but showed a 31 percent increase in
heroin-related emergency room visits, a 22 percent increase in
marijuana/hashish-related cases, and a 53 percent increase in
"speed" or methamphetamine cases.  

     Cases related to alcohol-drug combinations, methadone and LSD
showed no statistically significant change.  

     HHS Secretary Donna E. Shalala said, "Nearly half of all
heroin- and cocaine-related emergency room visits were for
detoxification or for treatment of chronic medical conditions,
including AIDS, related to drug use.  This shows, in part, that we
need to intervene earlier to help people get treatment for drug use
in a more effective and less expensive setting than an emergency
room -- before they develop chronic medical conditions." 

     Besides AIDS, the ailments that could lead drug users to
emergency rooms include such conditions as chronic active hepatitis,
recurring abscesses, neurotic disorders such as anxiety and
hysteria, and depressive disorders.

     HHS Assistant Secretary for Health Philip R. Lee, M.D., who is
director of the Public Health Service, said, "The DAWN figures show
the trap of addiction, and the costly consequences for the
individual's health and for society.  DAWN shows the importance of
education and other steps to prevent drug use, and of early
treatment when it occurs."  

     The overall upward trend in cocaine-related emergency
department visits occurring since 1985 appeared to level off in
1993, although six of 21 metropolitan areas surveyed still reported
increases from 1992 to 1993, with large increases in Buffalo (57
percent), Miami (36 percent) and Detroit (31 percent).      

     "The report suggests that we continue to have a large group of
aging habitual drug users who are experiencing more and more drug-
related medical problems and, as a result, have become dependent on
hospital emergency rooms for medical services," said Nelba 
Chavez, Ph.D., administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, an agency of the Public Health
Service.  SAMHSA conducts the DAWN survey.  "As this population
ages, it is likely that we will see more use of emergency rooms by
this group.  It is imperative that we break this cycle by finding
more effective ways of bringing those in need into treatment."  

     The DAWN survey provides information on the impact of drug use
on hospital emergency departments in the United States.  It reports
the number of episodes in which a person's visit to the emergency
department was directly related to the use of an illegal drug or the
non-medical use of a legal drug, including suicide attempts.  DAWN 
does not measure the prevalence of drug use, but rather some of its
health consequences.  In 1993, 508 hospitals provided information on
drug-related emergency room visits as part of the DAWN reporting
system.  

Demographic characteristics

     Age: From 1992 to 1993, the total number of drug-related
episodes rose by 12 percent for those aged 35 years and over (from
154,600 to 172,800), by 5 percent for those aged 26 to 34 years 
(from 133,500 to 140,200), and by 10 percent for persons aged 12 to
17 years (from 46,800 to 51,300).  There was no change among persons
aged 18-25 years.  

     In 1993, 37 percent of total drug-related episodes occurred
among persons aged 35 years and older, while 30 percent occurred
among persons aged 26-34 years.    

     Race/ethnicity:  From 1992 to 1993, total drug-related episodes
increased by 13 percent for Hispanics/Latinos (from 42,200 to
47,600) and by 7 percent for whites (from 235,600 to 252,000). 
There was no change among African-Americans.

     Gender: Total drug-related episodes increased by 9 percent for
women (from 210,100 to 228,800) and 6 percent for men (from 219,600
to 233,300) from 1992 to 1993.  Total drug-related episodes among
men and women have been approximately equal since 1988.  However,
men account for most cocaine- and heroin-related episodes (67
percent and 71 percent respectively). 

Total emergency room visits

     This year for the first time, DAWN data were compared by
demographic group to data on total emergency room visits for all
causes compiled in the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care
Survey, which was conducted in 1992 by another PHS agency, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

     In all, in 1992 there were 570 drug-related episodes for every
100,000 emergency room visits nationwide.  African-Americans used
emergency rooms for treatment of drug-related problems at a rate of
918 episodes per 100,000 overall visits; Hispanics/Latinos at a rate
of 595 per 100,000 visits and whites at 437 per 100,000.  

     The rate of drug-related episodes among men was 613 per 100,000
total emergency room visits and 522 among women.  

     By age, persons in age groups 26-34 and 35-44 both used
emergency rooms for drug-related crises at a rate of 944 episodes
per 100,000 total emergency room visits.          
                                 ###

Note:  Copies of the 1993 DAWN Advance Report No. 8 are available
from the SAMHSA press office, (301) 443-8956.


   
