                     "The New Gender Gap" by    XX          (b)(6)

I know most people are familiar with the subject of Transsexuals. Many talk 
shows use the topic to develop controversy and interest. Now for the rest of 
the story. Transsexualism is an emotional and mental disability. It is a 
component of a larger problem defined by the psychiatric community as Gender 
Identity Disorder, GID for short.

This is a diagnosis defined by the American Psychiatry Association. Pages 71- 
79 in the manual of Psychological Disorders called the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual - III-R, or DSM-III-R for short. GID has also covered 
Transvestism, Transvestic Fetishism, or Transgenderism.

Before I continue, I want to introduce you to a new term "gender-orientation." 
No, this has no connection with "sexual-orientation". The Kinsey Institute For 
Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction of Indiana University has determined 
in its research 2 scales of human behavior in this environment. The Kinsey 
scale of Hetero-Homosexual range scale 0 to 6 and the Gender Dysphoria Scale 
with a range of 0 to 6. This is proof that gender orientation and sexual 
orientation are indeed independent entities.

The people that live with GID are called the Gender Community or GC for short. 
I believe that the non-recognition of the GC is a great misjustice. In fact
the GC hasn't been, since 30 years after Christine Jorgenson, is beyond me.
The dismissal or the gender community by U.S. legal and governmental agencies
has self destructive effects on all citizens of the U.S.

One reason why the U.S. government hasn't addressed the issue is the way the 
media has approached the subject. Most stories in the media have portrayed the 
GID victim as sick, exhibitionistic, psychotic, or just plain stupid. The 
result is the general public hasn't been accurately educated.

You look at the tabloid, talk and news programming that people see. You can
get the idea that the subject of GID is just there to entertain people.
Tabloid and talk TV sensationalizes the GID problem. Most people interviewed
have had greater financial resources to get proper treatment medically and
mentally giving a false image of how most are well off.  Most or the GID
victims end up substance abusers, homeless, and/or prostitutes. The
interviewed subjects are a tiny few of the GC that use their position to just
get attention and not to really assist the other men and women who really are
hurting. Such interviews also don't educate the general public about the
extreme depression, extreme anxiety, and dissociative disorders that accompany
GID. 
                         
When the GID issue reaches the news media, it usually is because that persons 
who suffer act out in antisocial behaviors: Exhibition, Assault Rape, Murder. 
Violence or violent activity has never been associated with GID suffers. These 
are psychotic classed behaviors and not neurotic classed like GID. This 
terrifies the GC because the general public believe that GID sufferers are 
hideous monsters and should be incarcerated.

GID sufferers fear discovery by the public as a result. Often, they become 
paranoid. Most GID victims just want to be free to actively participate in 
becoming constructive citizens of the U.S. The news media doesn't mention the 
discrimination those people with GID bear. Work is almost impossible. They're 
turned down jobs only because of GID. This makes the GC hide in a closet.
Proof of this is the Tiffany Club of Wayland Massachusetts, where people pay
money to hide themselves in a house on Alpine St.

This leads me to another problem. Insurance carriers refuse to accept the 
psychiatric and medical professionals understanding that medical care for GID 
are a medical necessity. The processes you have to undertake to accomplish 
gender re-orientation are not paid for by insurers. The insurance firms use 
many methods to discriminate the use of their funds for gender-reorientation 
treatments.







01-02306

