
   KIRBY D. BLEDSOE, JR., PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 88-33

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1988

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Military Appeals

   Brief For The United States In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the Court of Military Appeals (Pet. App. 1a-4a) is
reported at 26 M.J. 97.  The initial opinion of the Air Force Court of
Military Review (Pet. App. 15a-22a) is reported at 16 M.J. 977.  The
opinion of the Air Force Court of Military Review on further review
(Pet. App. 25a-35a) is reported at 19 M.J. 641.  The order of the Air
Force Court of Military Review denying a petition for a new trial
(Pet. App. 23a-24a) is unreported.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the Court of Military Appeals was entered on May 9,
1988.  The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on July 7,
1988.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C.
(Supp. IV) 1259(3).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the prosecutor's use during cross-examination of a defense
psychiatrist of two statements petitioner made during a pretrial
sanity evaluation was plain error, in violation of Mil. R. Evid. 302.

                               STATEMENT

   Following a general court-martial at Lackland Air Force Base in
Texas, petitioner, a member of the United States Air Force, was
convicted of willful damage to military property and larceny, in
violation of Articles 108 and 121 of the Uniform Code of Military
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 908 and 921.  He was sentenced to
confinement for 30 months, a dishonorable discharge, and ancillary
punishments.  The convening authority approved the findings and
sentence.  The Air Force Court of Military Review initially remanded
the case for an additional inquiry into petitioner's competence and
mental responsibility (Pet. App. 15a-22a).  Following that inquiry,
the Air Force Court of Military Review denied petitioner's request for
a new trial (id. at 23a-24a) and subsequently affirmed the findings
and sentence (id. at 25a-35a).  The Court of Military Appeals affirmed
(id. at 1a-14a).

   1. Petitioner was charged with stealing various items from two
fellow airmen at Kelly Air Force Base in Texas on July 14, 1982.  Pet.
App. 3a, 26a.  After being charged with larceny, petitioner went to
Houston, Texas, to visit with his defense counsel (Tr. 159).  While in
Houston, petitioner committed himself to a civilian hospital for a
psychiatric examination and treatment (ibid.).  He was subsequently
transferred to Wilford Hall Air Force Medical Center at Lackland Air
Force Base in Texas (Tr. 159, 162).  A sanity board /1/ was convened
pursuant to a request by petitioner's counsel.  On December 22, 1982,
the board reported that petitioner had a neurosis known as a
"conversion disorder" and that he was malingering (PX 1;  see Tr.
7-10, 23-26, 163-165).  /2/ The board found that petitioner was
competent to stand trial and concluded that at the time of the charged
offense petitioner did not lack substantial capacity to appreciate the
wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of the law (PX 1;  Tr. 12, 23-26, 163, 165-166).  /3/ On
December 29, petitioner was informed about the sanity board's report
(Tr. 213), and the next day he damaged his hospital room (Tr. 174-177,
179, 181, 184-187, 213;  PXs 5-10).  Later that day, when he was
returned to Kelly Air Force Base, petitioner also damaged his
dormitory room at the base (Tr. 182-184;  Pet. App. 4a).  Those
actions led to petitioner's being charged with willfully damaging
government property.

   2. At trial, petitioner defended against the larceny charge on the
grounds that he did not take the property and that, even if he did, he
was unable to form the requisite intent for larceny due to voluntary
intoxication.  Pet. App. 5a n.4, 33a.  Petitioner's defense to the
willful damage charge was insanity.  To support his insanity defense,
petitioner called Dr. Thomas Martin, a psychiatrist who served on the
sanity board (Tr. 63, 89-90, 207-217).  Dr. Martin testified that in
his opinion petitioner was suffering from a conversion disorder, that
he was suffering from that disorder when he damaged the rooms, and
that the disorder might have adversely affected petitioner's ability
to control his actions.  Dr. Martin, however, could not offer "a good
answer" as to whether, in light of the conversion disorder,
petitioner's damage to the rooms on December 30 was "willful" (Tr.
214-215;  Pet. App. 6a).  He did testify, however, that petitioner had
the capacity to know right from wrong and to control his behavior (Tr.
214).

   Following Dr. Martin's testimony, the prosecutor asked the trial
judge to release the full sanity board report to the prosecution
pursuant to Mil. R. Evid. 302 (Tr. 218).  /4/ The defense objected on
the ground that Dr. Martin's testimony had not "opened the door" to
release the entire report (Tr. 218-219), but the trial judge overruled
the objection and permitted the prosecution to see the entire report
(Tr. 222).  /5/ At that point, the prosecutor advised the court and
defense counsel that he had become aware of two statements petitioner
had made during his hospitalization at Wilford Hall.  One was a
statement petitioner made to Dr. Martin that petitioner and his wife
were experiencing "financial problems." The other statement was a
remark petitioner made in the hallway to his attending psychiatrist,
Dr. Wallace Townsend-Parchman, which was overheard by Dr. Martin.  In
that statement, petitioner told Dr. Townsend-Parchman, "'You are not
going to get me on this offense.  I'm going to beat this rap'" (Tr.
222;  Pet. App. 7a, 8a).  The defense objected on the ground that the
statements laced probative value and were prejudicial (Tr. 222-223).
/6/ The trial judge overruled the objection (Tr. 223), and Dr. Martin
testified about the statements during his cross-examination (Tr.
224-225).  Dr. Martin testified that he learned that "(petitioner) was
having considerable financial difficulties and as he put it, he was
receiving a lot of pressure from his wife to obtain funds" (Tr. 224).
Dr. Martin also said that he overheard petitioner tell Dr.
Townsend-Parchman that, "'I am going to show you guys.  I am going to
beat this rap'" (Tr. 225).

   3. The Court of Military Appeals affirmed.  Pet. App. 1a-14a.  It
suggested (id. at 11a-14a) that the prosecutor's use of petitioner's
statements to Drs. Martin and Townsend-Parchman may have violated the
privilege granted by Mil. R. Evid. 302(a), but the court ruled (Pet.
App. 14a) that petitioner had waived his claim of privilege by failing
to assert it at trial as a basis for excluding his statements, as
required by Mil. R. Evid. 103(a)(1).  /7/

                               ARGUMENT

   Petitioner contends that the prosecutor's, cross-examination of Dr.
Martin, the defense psychiatrist, about certain statements petitioner
made in the doctor's presence during the sanity board evaluation
violated the Fifth Amendment and Mil. R. Evid. 302(a).  Petitioner
also argues that the Court of Military Appeals erred in concluding
that he waived his claim by not raising it at trial.

   1. The admission of petitioner's statements to Dr. Martin did not
violate the Fifth Amendment.  By the time the prosecutor introduced
petitioner's statements, petitioner had requested and received a
sanity board examination, and he had introduced psychiatric testimony
to support his insanity defense.  Under these circumstances,
petitioner could not invoke the Fifth Amendment against the
prosecutor's use of his statements.  Buchanan v. Kentucky, No. 85-5348
(June 24, 1987), slip op. 20-21.  Like the defendant in Buchanan,
petitioner sought a psychiatric evaluation before trial and introduced
evidence resulting from that examination in support of a defense of
insanity.  In that setting, this Court held that the Fifth Amendment
is no bar to the prosecution's use of other evidence from the reports
of the examination that the defendant requested.  See also Estelle v.
Smith, 451 U.S. 454, 465 (1981).  The Fifth Amendment analysis should
be no different simply because the statements being offered were
statements made by the defendant during the period he was undergoing
the psychiatric evaluation, rather than excerpts from the examiners'
reports -- the evidence that was at issue in Buchanan.  /8/

   2. With respect to the claim that the introduction of petitioner's
statements violated Mil. R. Evid. 302, the Court of Military Appeals
correctly ruled that petitioner waived that objection at trial.  Rule
103(a)(1), Mil. R. Evid., requires the defendant to specify the
particular ground on which evidence should be excluded and provides
that the failure to do so constitutes a waiver of that claim.  Because
petitioner objected only to the relevance and prejudicial effect of
the statements, and not on the ground that the statements were
privileged under Rule 302, the Court of Military Appeals properly held
that petitioner could not assert his claim of privilege for the first
time on appeal.

   Petitioner does not deny that he failed expressly to invoke Mil. R.
Evid. 302(a) at trial.  Rather, he argues (Pet. 10) that his claim was
apparent when considered in context and that it was unnecessary for
him to cite that particular rule.  That argument is unpersuasive.
Despite being advised that the prosecutor was aware of petitioner's
statements and sought to use them on cross-examination of Dr. Martin,
petitioner objected soley on the grounds of the relevancy and
prejudicial effect of his statements (Tr. 222-223).  Petitioner did
not refer to any claim of privilege or confidentiality, nor did he say
anything from which such a claim could fairly be inferred.  In these
circumstances, petitioner has waived his Rule 302(a) claim.  /9/

   Petitioner also contends (Pet. 9-10) that under the circumstances
of this case his failure to object to the admission of his statements
under Rule 302 should be excused.  As support for his argument,
petitioner relies on a footnote in Estelle v. Smith, 451 U.S. at 468
n.12.  Petitioner's reliance on Smith is misplaced, however.  In
Smith, the State asserted that the failure to object resulted in the
waiver of the defendant's Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights.  In this
case, as we have noted, petitioner waived any constitutional objection
to the introduction of his statements by raising an insanity defense
and introducing psychiatric testimony to support that defense.  The
failure to object therefore resulted in a waiver only of petitioner's
claims under Rule 302, not his constitutional claim.  The court of
appeals in Smith, in a ruling adopted by this Court (see 451 U.S. at
468 n.12), held that the failure to object in that case did not
constitute a waiver of "all of the many constitutional rights that the
state violated," in part because the State did not only rely on the
failure to object in the course of habeas corpus proceedings in the
federal district court, and in part because the Texas courts had made
it clear that they did not regard the constitutional claims as valid.
Smith v. Estelle, 602 F.2d 694, 708 n.19 (5th Cir. 1979).  In this
case, the government relied below on petitioner's failure to object to
the challenged evidence on Rule 302 grounds, and there is no
suggestion, on petitioner's part or otherwise, that the invocation of
Rule 302 at trial would have been a futile act.

   Finally, the Court of Military Appeals found (Pet. App. 14a) that
the two statements that were admitted at trial "would have had minimal
impact on the factfinder's determination of guilt or innocence,
including mental responsibility." In light of the overwhelming
evidence against petitioner (see id. at 33a), the court was correct in
finding that any error in the admission of the two statements was
harmless.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   JOE R. LAMPORT

      Col., OJAG, USAF

   ROBERT E. GIOVAGNONI

      Lt. Col., OJAG, USAF

   MARC VAN NUYS

      Capt., OJAG, USAF Appellate Government Counsel Government Trial
      and Appellate Division

   AUGUST 1988

   /1/ A "sanity board" conducts a psychiatric examination of the
accused to determine his competency to stand trial and his mental
responsibility at the time of the offense.  Examination by a sanity
board may be ordered by the convening authority or trial judge sua
sponte, or on the request of the prosecutor, defense counsel, or
investigating officer, whenever there is a reason to believe that the
accused is incompetent to stand trial or was insane at the time of the
alleged offense.

   /2/ A "conversion disorder" is a neurotic condition characterized
by the involuntary production of physical symptoms that suggest a loss
of or alteration in physical functioning (such as paralysis,
blindness, seizures, stuttering, etc.), but is actually an expression
of psychological conflict or need.  APA, Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders 244 (3d ed. 1980).  "Malingering" is not
considered a mental disorder.  It is characterized by the voluntary
production and presentation of false or grossly exaggerated physical
or psychological symptoms in pursuit of obviously recognizable and
understandable goals (such as avoidance of military duty or
prosecution for a crime).  Id. at 331.  Malingering presents features
that are similar to a conversion disorder, but malingering differs in
that the production of symptoms is voluntary and the reasons for
producing them is obvious and recognizable.  Id. at 332.  See Tr. 8,
163-164, 211-212.

   /3/ The test for insanity that was in effect at the time of
petitioner's trial was the one proposed by the American Law
Institute's Model Penal Code Section 4.01 (1974), which provided that
an accused is not mentally responsible for criminal conduct if at the
time of such conduct, as a result of mental disease or defect, the
accused lacked substantial capacity either to appreciate the
wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of the law.  See United States v. Frederick, 3 M.J. 230
(C.M.A. 1977);  Manual for Courts-Martial, United States -- 1969 para.
120b (rev. ed.) (Manual).

   /4/ At the time of petitioner's trial, the prosecution was entitled
to receive only the sanity board's ultimate conclusions, not its full
report.  Manual para. 121.  The prosecutor was entitled to receive the
full report, except for the defendant's statements, if the defense
offered expert testimony on the defendant's mental condition.  Mil. R.
Evid. 302(c).  If the defendant introduced his statements or
"derivative evidence," the defendant was not entitled to claim a
privilege under the rule.  Mil. R. Evid. 302(b)(1).

   /5/ Petitioner does not challenge the trial judge's decision to
release the full sanity board report to the prosecutor.

   /6/ Petitioner's entire objection to the statements was as follows
(Tr. 222-223):

         The financial statements, of course, were with the belief
      that he is innocent of the offense.  Rather than impugning any
      sinister motives, beating the system or indicating illnesses,
      these are consistent with the actions that Airman Bledsoe has
      taken in electing to plead not guilty to the offense.  Secondly,
      as to the first statement, we would object to it on its
      probative value;  that any probative value that statement has is
      so slight that it is embarrassing and to the prejudicial effect
      it will have that it should not be admitted.  Again, we see the
      connection between those two events to be very tenuous at best.
      Of course, what we have is a young airman with a new family and
      any airman in that position is presumably going to have
      financial problems.  I think the Air Force has consistently
      recognized that and we respectfully ask the court not to admit
      either of those statements.

   /7/ Mil. R. Evid. 103(a)(1), which was taken from Fed. R. Evid.
103(a)(1), provides as follows:

         (a) Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits or
      excludes evidence unless the ruling materially prejudices a
      substantial right of a party, and

         (1) Objection.  In case the ruling is one admitting evidence,
      a timely objection or motion to strike appears of record,
      stating the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground
      was not apparent from the context(.)

   /8/ The decision below does not conflict with the Third Circuit's
decision in United States v. Alvarez, 519 F.2d 1036 (1975).  That case
involved 18 U.S.C. 4244, which authorizes a district court to order a
psychiatric examination of the defendant to determine his competency
to stand trial.  In Alvarez, the court held that Section 4244 does not
permit the government to introduce the testimony of a psychiatrist who
examined a defendant for competency under the authority of that
statute, when the testimony is used to rebut an insanity defense.  519
F.2d at 1044.  The court read the statute in that manner because of
its concern that allowing the government to introduce a psychiatrist's
testimony would violate the defendant's Fifth Amendment rights.  Ibid.
 In light of this Court's subsequent decision in Buchanan v. Kentucky,
supra, the Third Circuit's concern is now unfounded.  In any event,
the Alvarez case was not a direct application of the Fifth Amendment.
Rather, the court construed 18 U.S.C. 4244, a statute not at issue in
this case.

   /9/ Petitioner's argument (Pet. 10) that his claim of privilege was
properly invoked when considered in context does not fairly
characterize the record.  Immediately after defense counsel said "I
object" to the prosecutor's request for disclosure of the sanity board
report, the trial judge asked defense counsel for "the basis for your
objection" (Tr. 219).  Defense counsel replied, "The witness has not
testified to open up any door for the Government to go behind and see
what the sanity board had to say whatsoever" (ibid.).  That response
deals with the issue of disclosure of the sanity board report, not the
issue of the use of petitioner's statements at trial.  The objection
therefore did not amount to a claim of privilege under Rule 302 for
petitioner's statements.
