
   GOLDEN STATE TRANSIT CORPORATION, PETITIONER V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

   No. 84-1644

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1985

   On Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit

   Brief for the National Labor Relations Board as Amicus Curiae
Supporting Petitioner

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Interest of the National Labor Relations Board
   Statement
   Introduction and summary of argument
   Argument:
      The court of appeals erred in affirming the grant of
      summary judgment in favor of the city on the basis that
      the City's refusal to renew the taxicab franchise of
      am employer unless it resolved its labor dispute is a
      matter of peripheral concern under the NLRA
      A. Congress protected the right of parties to
          collective bargaining disputes to resolve their
          differences through the free play of economic forces
      B. The invocation of the City's legitimate concern
          with transportation is not sufficeint in itself to
          except its actions from the operation of the preemption
          doctrine
   Conclusion

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the court of appeals correctly affirmed summary judgement
in favor of a municipality on a claim that its refusal to renew an
employer's taxicab franchise unless the employer settled a labor
dispute with its striking employees was preempted by the National
Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 151 et seq.

            INTEREST OF THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD

   The question presented in this case is whether the National Labor
Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 151 et seq., preempts a city from
conditioning renewal of an employer's taxicab franchise solely on the
employer's settlement of a collective bargaining dispute with its
striking employees.  The court of appeals held that the city's action
was not preempted because it was "concerned with transportation" and
therefore "d(id) not implicate or conflict with (the) federal labor
policy" that collective bargaining disputes be resolved by the free
play of economic forces between the parties (Pet. App. 7a).

   The system of free collective bargaining is at the core of the Act.
 See Sections 7 and 8(d), 29 U.S.C. 157 and 158(d).  As the agency
assigned by Congress the responsibility for administering the Act and
implementing the national labor policy expressed therein, the National
Labor Relations Board has a significant interest in the proper
application of the preemption doctrine, which is designed in part to
preclude direct state and local interference with private collective
bargaining conduct that Congress intended to leave unregulated.

                               STATEMENT

   1. Petitioner Golden State Transit Corporation was the owner of a
taxicab franchise granted by respondent City of Los Angeles.  Upon
acquiring the franchise in 1977, Golden State entered into a
collective bargaining agreement covering its drivers with Teamsters
Local 572.  In March 1980, Golden State applied to the City for
renewal of its franchise;  that franchise, as well as those of the
City's other taxicab operators, was due to expire on March 31, 1981.
In the interim, the City studied its taxicab industry, and various
legislative and administrative bodies, including the City Council's
Transportation and Traffic Commitee, recommended that Golden State's
franchise be renewed for a four-year term.  Pet. App. 2a, 27a-28a.

   The City Council scheduled action on ordinances renewing the
franchises of Golden State and other operators for February 11, 1981.
Shortly before that meeting, on February 5, the Union informed the
City Council that it was involved in a labor dispute with Golden
State, the collective bargaining agreement having expired in October
1980.  On the day of the City Council meeting, Golden State's drivers
went out on strike.  A Union representative appeared before the City
Council on February 11 and urged the Council not to approve Golden
State's franchise because of the labor dispute.  The Council voted on
February 11 to renew the franchise of the other operators that had
been recommended for long-term renewal, but it postponed consideration
of Golden State's franchise until February 17.  Pet. App. 2a, 15a,
28a.

   At the Council's meeting on February 17, 1981, the Union again
opposed Golden State's renewal application on the basis of the labor
dispute (J.A. 117).  The same day, the Union told Golden State that if
it "'doesn't settle (its) labor dispute, (it is) going to have a lot
of trouble renewing (its) franchise'" and later told the employer, "We
are going to see that the City revokes or does not renew your
franchise if you do not meet our demands" (J.A. 52, 117;  citation
omitted).  The Council conditionally extended Golden State's franchise
only until April 30, 1981, provided that the Council found on or
before March 27 that this 30-day extension was "in the best interest
of the City." No other franchise was made subject to this condition.
Pet App. 2a, 15a, 28a.

   The City Council next met on March 23, 1981 to consider renewal of
Golden State's franchise.  At that meeting, union representatives
accused Golden State of intransigence and bargaining in bad faith, and
again asked that the franchise not be renewed.  The Union stated that
it hoped its drivers would be hired by Golden State's successor and
that one operator had assured them that the drivers would be hired if
its franchise were extended to cover Golden State's service area.
J.A. 42-53, 60, 62;  Pet. App. 16a.

   Following presentations by the parties, the President of the City
Council stated that "'it will be very difficult to get this ordinance
passed to extend this franchise if the labor dispute is not settled by
the end of the week.'" (Pet. App. 29a).  Councilman Cunningham,
referring to Golden State's striking drivers, stated (J.A. 66-67):

      I still think that what they are saying to us they don't intend
      to continue to be wage slaves or continue to be jacked around
      and jerked around at the whim and caprice of the owner or
      operator of that facility.  I think it would be wise for us as
      members of this Council to clearly make a statement by turning
      down this extension(.) (A)s soon as there is an agreement, we
      can certainly reopen the matter and be able to extend the
      franchise.

   The general manager of the City's Department of Transportation
testified at the meeting that he had not received an increased number
of complaints about cab service since the strike began (J.A. 69-70).
Councilman Yaroslavsky, after noting that a refusal to renew the
license might create a more healthy taxicab market, concluded, "my
intuition tells me in this case that (Golden State) has not made every
effort to (n)egotiate. * * * I just don't like the attitude, * * * I
don't like the negotiating posture, * * * we have a responsibility to
do justice, * * * and that is why my inclination is to vote * * * to
withdraw their franchise" (J.A. 71-72).

   The City Council then refused to extend Golden State's franchise
beyond March 31, 1981 by a vote of 11 to 1 (Pet. App. 3a, 16a).  "It
is undipusted that the sole basis for refusing to extend (Golden
State's) franchise was its labor dispute with its Teamster drivers"
(id. at 29a).

   2. Golden State brought this action in the United States District
Court for the Central District of California alleging, inter alia,
that the City's action was preempted by the National Labor Relations
Act (NLRA or the Act), 29 U.S.C. 151 et seq.  The district court
granted a preliminary injunction preserving Golden State's franchise
(Pet. App. 26a-32a).  After finding that the City refused to renew the
franchise solely because of the labor dispute (id. at 29a), the
district court reasoned (id. at 32a):

      By threatening to allow (Golden State's) franchise to terminate
      unless it entered into a collective bargaining agreement with
      the Teamsters, the City Council effectively denied (Golden
      State) of its most basic weapon(,) the economic strength of an
      on-going franchise.  Since Congress has sanctioned the self-help
      measures taken by (Golden State) here in resisting the signing
      of a new contract with the Union, the City Council is precluded
      by the Supremacy Clause from taking legislative action which
      would frustrate the purposes of the N.L.R.A.

   The court of appeals reversed (Pet. App. 18a-25a).  Although it
upheld the district court's finding that "the city deprived (Golden
State) of an economic weapon -- the opportunity simply to outlast the
strikers" (id. at 20a), the court of appeals concluded that Golden
State had not demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits
because the regulation of taxicabs is a matter of local interest that
Congress did not intend to preempt in the NLRA (id. at 21a).

   3. On remand, the district court granted summary judgement in favor
of the City (Pet. App. 11a-17a).  With respect to the preemption
issue, the district court relied solely on the court of appeals'
decision reversing the grant of a preliminary injunction to Golden
State (id. at 17a).

   The court of appeals affirmed the grant of summary judgement,
although for different reasons than those given on the earlier appeal
(Pet. App. 10a).  The court of appeals upheld the district court's
findings that the City "insisted upon resolution of the (labor)
dispute as a condition to franchise renewal" (id. at 8a) and that this
insistence "altered the balance of economic power" between the parties
(id. at 4a n.1).  It concluded, however, that "(n)othing in the record
indicates that the City's refusal to renew or extend Golden State's
franchise until an agreement was reached and operations resumed was
not concerned with transportation" (id. at 7a).

   This concern with transportation was, in the court's view, a matter
peripheral to the NLRA and therefore excepted from the preemption
doctrine (Pet. App. 4a).  /1/ The court noted the ubiquity of local
regulation of public utilities and the impact such regulation may have
on labor disputes (id. at 7a-8a).  In light of the necessity for this
regulation, the court determined that "only actions seeking to
directly alter the substantive outcome of a labor dispute should be
preempted" (id. at 8a).  Because it concluded that "(t)he City did not
attempt to dictate terms of the collective bargaining agreement or
alter the substantive outcome of the dispute," the court of appeals
held that "(t)he City's refusal to renew Golden State's franchise is *
* * not preempted by the NLRA" (ibid.).  /2/

                 INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   The court of appeals held that the actions of the City Council in
respect to petitioner's franchise renewal were not preempted because
they dealt with "transportation," a matter of local concern only
"peripheral" to the policies of the National Labor Relations Act.  The
court properly invoked the City's legitimate interests, but did so in
so wholly conclusory a fashion and with so little reference to the
sparse record developed below on summary judgment that it is not
possible to determine what meaning the court ascribed to these general
concerns or how it supposed they applied to the facts of this case.
Before turning to the merits of our argument, it is important to
understand the nature and scope of the federal labor laws, and how
they mesh with the backdrop of local regulation of matters of local
concern that Congress did not intend to displace.

   1. Since the earliest days of the NLRA this Court has emphasized
that Congress intended that Act to be a comprehensive scheme governing
the major aspects of labor-management relations within its scope.  /3/
Not only were the terms of the Act itself intended to provide the
general and uniform framework for labor relations throughout the
nation, but the National Labor Relations Board was to have
comprehensive and plenary authority to interpret those terms and to
develop national labor policy within the discretion those general
terms necessarily implied.  /4/ In this respect the NLRA differs both
from federal regulatory schemes which are not intended to be fully
comprehensive, such as the environmental laws, /5/ and also from
schemes like the antitrust laws, the administration of which is not
entrusted exclusively to a single agency to the exclusion of private
actions outside of the regulatory framework.  /6/

   Indeed, the Board not only administers the Act and adjudicates
disputes under it, but with few exceptions actions regarding its
provisions can only be initiated by the Board's General Counsel.  It
is this congressional purpose to legislate comprehensively, early
recognized by this Court and continuously reaffirmed through the
various revisions of the original Act, which must be the touchstone of
any preemption analysis.

   Though the Act is comprehensive, this Court has always recognized
in various formulations two implicit limitations on its reach,
limitations that must reasonably be inferred from Congress's purpose
to legislate within our federal system, where not only does residual
sovereignty reside in the States, but also as a vivid reality large
responsibilities for governing the day-to-day activities of ordinary
people's lives are assumed by state and local governments.  Thus,
first of all, local authority over the urgent matters of public
welfare and safety and the basic relations expressed in the common law
are not lightly to be presumed to have been displaced.  Hence the
decision affirming continued local authority to assure freedom from
violence /7/ and destruction of reputation, /8/ and to guarantee the
sanctity of promises made to third parties.  /9/ In none of these
instances is the state purporting to alter, affect, or even supplement
the regulation of labor relations as such, but rather it acts out of
its residual responsibility to maintain the background structures of
civil peace and legality which the national scheme must assume but
cannot assure.

   Second, this Court has recognized that local governments as they
legislate for the general welfare of their citizens cannot help but
affect indirectly the situation from which the participants in the
economic struggle structured by the labor laws wage their bargaining
battles.  Child welfare laws or workplace safety laws of general
applicability deal with matters which may be the subjects of
collective bargaining.  A statute requring that any health plan
offered in the state, whether or not by an employer, whether or not
pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, must have certain
minimum features, has the incidental effect of setting the floor for a
matter which has traditionally been the subject of hard bargaining.
/10/ Hospital cost containment legislation may limit the revenues
available to an employer and thus the employer's ability to make
concessions in collective bargaining;  /11/ If such incidental effects
on collective bargaining were held to be preempted there would be
little indeed that a state might do in pursuit of nonlabor-related
welfare or regulatory goals.

   The recognition of these considerations, inevitably raised in our
federal system if local responsibilities are not to be automatically
overwhelmed whenever Congress enacts, as here, a comprehensive scheme
for a limited though crucial subject matter, has given rise to the
concepts of local interest, peripheral concern, and incidental effect,
concepts which the court of appeals employed in this case.  Yet as
these concepts have been invoked by this Court, it has always been
with a searching and sensitive analysis of the particular
circumstances, of the actual purposes served by the local regulation
and its actual effect on labor relations.  Such an inquiry, if
indulged in simply to determine the reasonableness in general of state
regulation, would be uncomfortably reminiscent of substantive due
process analysis, but here it is driven by a need to relate the
state's action to Congress's intent in the NLRA, and thus is
inevitable if terms such as "local interest" are not to become mere
talismans justifying any and all state impingements on nationally
regulated labor relations.

   This inquiry is not, moreover, so particularistic as itself to
constitute a mere substitution of judicial judgments of the overall
wisdom of local legislation.  Rather, more general guidelines are
available.  To begin with, whatever its justification, local action
cannot be allowed to affect the central reaches of the federal labor
laws.  /12/ Nor is the list of local concerns requiring special
deference infinitely expandable.  Rather, it is limited to central
areas of local concern (see page 9, supra).  And while additions to
this list may be contemplated, they cannot be casually admitted.
Furthermore, where local action does have an affect on the balance of
forces between employers and employees, the Court has sought to assure
itself that this effect was indeed incidental, i.e., a side-effect of
a measure general in scope and palpably directed at non-labor-related
ends.  /13/ Finally, even where these conditions are met, the state
purpose cannot be one which could be readily accomplished by means
less intrusive on values protected by national labor policy.  /14/

   2. With these considerations in mind, it is clear that the court of
appeals' narrow focus on the conclusory and undifferentiated statement
that the City's concern was with transportation services obscured
proper analysis of the preemption issue in this case.  This issue
depends on Congress's intent in the National Labor Relations Act.  In
the Act, Congress protected the right of employers and employees to
rely on their respective economic power in settling collective
bargaining disputes.  Neither the Board nor state or local governments
may regulate those aspects of a labor dispute that Congress intended
to be governed by the free play of economic forces.  Such state and
local regulation is preempted.  Lodge 76, Int'l Ass'n of Machinists v.
Wisconsin Employment Relations Comm'n, 427 U.S. 132 (1976).

   The mere invocation by the City of an interest in transportation
cannot exclude its regulation from the preemption doctrine.  Indeed
since petitioner was in the taxi business any regulation of it had
something to do with transportation;  yet the taxi business is not
exempt from the NLRA.  Rather, the appropriate inquiry is whether
Congress can be taken to have intended in the Act to remove particular
labor relations conduct from the sphere of local regulation.  That the
conduct arises in the context of transportation regulation may help to
elucidate congressional intent.  And proper analysis of that intent
must take into account that legitimate local regulatory activity may
often have substantial though indirect effects on the outcome of the
collective bargaining process so that such effects alone cannot be
sufficient to mandate preemption.  This Court has also made clear,
however, that it is that congressional intent which must control and
not some balance of national and local interests struck ad hoc by a
reviewing court.  Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, No.
84-325 (June 3, 1985), slip op. 24 n.27;  Amalgamated Ass'n of Street,
Elec. Ry. & Motor Coach Employees v. Wisconsin Employment Relations
Board, 340 U.S. 383 (1951).  Where the regulation incidentally burdens
the exercise of a federally guaranteed right, therefore, it is at
least incumbent on the state or locality to demonstrate a sufficiently
close and urgent relationship between the burden imposed and the
achievement of a legitimate interest that Congress cannot be thought
to have preempted the regulation.  Judged by this standard, summary
judgment in favor of the City was plainly erroneous.  The case should
be remanded for further proceedings under the correct legal standard.

                               ARGUMENT

 THE COURT OF APPEALS ERRED IN AFFIRMING THE GRANT OF SUMMARY JUDGMENT
IN FAVOR OF THE CITY ON THE BASIS THAT THE CITY'S REFUSAL TO RENEW THE
TAXICAB FRANCHISE OF AN EMPLOYER UNLESS IT RESOLVED ITS LABOR DISPUTE
IS A MATTER OF PERIPHERAL CONCERN UNDER THE NLRA

 A. Congress Protected The Right Of Parties To Collective Bargaining
Disputes To Resolve Their Differences Through The Free Play Of
Economic Forces

   Employees are guaranteed the right to bargain collectively in
Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 157.  In
Section 8(d) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. 158(d), Congress specified that the
duty to bargain "does not compel either party to agree to a proposal
or require the making of a concession." This Section permits the
employers and employees to rely, within the limits stated in the Act,
on their own economic strength in settling collective bargaining
disputes.

   This Court has therefore long held that the Board cannot "regulate
what economic weapons a party might summon to its aid." NLRB v.
Insurance Agents' Int'l Union (Insurance Agents), 361 U.S. 477, 490
(1960).  The reason for this rule is plain (ibid.):

      (I)f the Board could regulate the choice of economic weapons
      that may be used as part of collective bargaining, it would be
      in a position to exercise considerable influence upon the
      substantive terms on which the parties contract. * * * Our labor
      policy is not presently erected on a foundation of government
      control of the results of negotioations. * * * Nor does it
      contain a charter for the National Labor Relations Board to act
      at large in equalizing disparities of bargaining power between
      employer and employee.

   The ability to rely on one's economic power in resolving collective
bargaining disputes, the Court concluded (id. at 489), "is part and
parcel of the system that the (NRLA) ha(s) recognized." Thus, for
example, unions may strike, /15/ and employers may attempt to continue
operating by hiring permanent replacements for the strikers.  /16/

   State and local governments have no more authority than does the
Board to regulate the resort to economic weapons by parties to a labor
dispute.  In Lodge 76, Int'l Ass'n of Machinists v. Wisconsin
Employment Relations Comm'n (Machinisits), 427 U.S. 132 (1976), the
Court applied the teachings of Insurance Agents to preempt a state
order prohibiting a unions' concerted refusal to work overtime.  The
Court observed that Congress intended that certain conduct "be
controlled by the free play of economic forces" rather than be
subjected to governmental regulation (id. at 140;  quotation marks
omitted).  Accordingly, state regulation that upsets the balance
struck by Congress "between the uncontrolled power of management and
labor to further their respective interest" (id. at 146;  quotation
marks omitted) must be preempted.  Like the Board, states may not
"'(enter) into the substantive aspects of the bargaining process to an
extent Congress has not countenanced'" (id. at 149, quoting Insurance
Agents, 361 U.S. at 498).

   Similarly, in Local 20, Teamsters Union v. Morton, 337 U.S. 252
(1964), the Court held that a state could not prohibit certain
secondary boycott activity that Congress had not prohibited.  "The
inevitable result" of allowing such state regulation to stand, the
Court reasoned (id. at 260), "would be to frustrate the congressional
determination to leave this weapon to self-help available, and to
upset the balance of power between labor and management expressed in
our national labor policy." As the Court recently noted, "(t)hese
cases rely on the understanding that in providing in the NLRA a
framework for self-organization and collective bargaining, Congress
determined both how much the conduct of unions and employers should be
regulated, and how much it should be left unregulated." Metropolitan
Life ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, No. 84-325 (June 3, 1985), slip op.
25.  /17/

 B. The Invocation Of The City's Legitimate Concern With
Transportation Is Not Sufficient In Itself To Exempt Its Action From
The Operation Of the Preemption Doctrine

   1. "(A)s in any preemption analysis, (t)he purpose of Congress is
the ultimate touchstone." Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., slip op. 22
(quotation marks omitted).  In San Diego Building Trades Council v.
Gramon, 359 U.S. 236 (1959), the Court addressed in part conduct
(arguably subject to Section 7 or Section 8 of the Act" (id. at 245;
emphasis added.) In such circumstances, preemption is intended not to
protect a federal right but to safeguard the primary jurisdiction of
the Board and thereby to avoid the potential for conflict between
state and federal regulation.  While preemption presumptively follows
from the potential for conflict, state regulation may stand where it
addresses activity that is "a merely peripheral concern" of the NLRA
(id. at 243) or is "deeply rooted in local feeling and responsibility"
(id. at 244).  A balancing test to determine whether "(t)he state
interests involved * * * outweigh any possible interference with the
Board's function" has therefore been established under this branch of
the preemption doctrine.  Belknap, Inc. v. Hale, 463 U.S. 491, 511
(1983);  see Local 926, Int'l Union of Operating Eng'rs v. Jones, 460
U.S. 669, 676 (1983).

   This form of balancing, however, is not directly relevant to
preemption under the Machinists doctrine:

         If the state law regulates conduct that is actually protected
      by federal law, * * * pre-emption follows not as a matter of
      protecting primary jurisdiction, but as a matter of substantive
      right.  Where * * * the issue is one of an asserted substantive
      conflict with a federal enactment, then "(t)he relative
      importance to the State of its own law is not material . . . for
      the Framers of our Constitution provided that the federal law
      must prevail."

   Brown v. Hotel & Restaurant Employees Int'l Union Local 54, No.
83-498 (July 2, 1984), slip op. 11, quoting Free v. Bland, 369 U.S.
663, 666 (1962).  Where Congress intended that activity be left
unregulated by the States, the Supremacy Clause requires that its
intent prevail, regardless of the relative strengths of the federal
and local interests at stake.  /18/

   The Court recently explained the appropriate inquiry in
Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, supra.  Referring to the
Machinists line of cases, the Court noted that "(s)uch preemption does
not involve in the first instance a balancing of state and federal
interests, * * * but an analysis of the structure of the federal labor
law to determine whether certain conduct was meant to be unregulated"
(slip op. 24 n.27).  The Court explained, however, that "(a)n
appreciation of the State's interest in regulating a certain kind of
conduct may still be relevant in determining whether Congress in fact
intended the conduct to be unregulated" (ibid.).  Thus, Congress
surely intended to leave the states room to pursue legitimate local
regulatory purposes notwithstanding an incidental effect on labor
relations.

   The court of appeals erred, however, in resting its conclusion on
the mere fact of the City's concern with transportation (see Pet. App.
6a-7a).  /19/ To the extent that the court of appeals concluded that
the City was entitled to regulate the labor relations of Golden State
and its employees merely because the employer provided transportation
services, this Court long ago laid that notion to rest.  In
Amalgamated Ass'n of Street, Elec. Ry. & Motor Coach Employees v.
Wisconsin Employment Relations Board, 340 U.S. 383 (1951), the Court
rejected a similar argument in holding that a state law prohibiting
strikes by employees of public utilities, including those providing
transportation, was preempted by the NLRA.  The State's argument
"stress(ing) the importance of gas and transit service to the local
community and urg(ing) that predominantly local problems are best left
to local governmental authority for solution" (id. at 397) was
unavailaing because Congress's protection of the right to strike
"occupied th(e) field and closed it to state regulation" (id. at 390;
quotation marks omitted).

   2. Resolution of whether the City's action in this case was
preempted by the NLRA requires an analysis of whether and in what
manner the City burdened a right protected under the NLRA.  See, e.g.,
Belknap, Inc. v. Hale, 463 U.S. at 499 -- 507 (Machinists preemption
inapplicable to state breach-of-contract action that did not have
substantial impact on conduct that Congress intended to be left
unregulated).  If the City directly intruded into the parties' labor
relations by prohibiting recourse to economic self-help, the matter is
at an end under Machinists.  If, on the other hand, the City's action
indirectly affected the bargaining process, the City must demonstrate
that Congress nonetheless must be taken to have intended to permit its
action, notwithstanding its ancillary effect of interfering with the
collective bargaining process, if that action is not to be preempted.
On the City's motion for summary judgment, factual disputes and
inference from the facts are resolved against it and in favor of
Golden State.  E.g., Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 816 n.25
(1982).

   a. In determining whether the City burdened a protected right, it
is first necessary to identify precisely what the City did.  On one
view of the case, the City Council voted only to refuse to grant
Golden State a 30-day extension of its franchise.  Because the City
had earlier conditioned that extension on whether it would be in the
best interests of the City, the Council's vote may be interpreted
simply as a finding that the extension would not in fact serve the
City's transportation needs.  See pages 3-4, supra.

   Golden State's labor dispute could have had obvious relevance to
the City's concern that an effective level of service be provided to
its residents.  It would not have been impermissible, therefore, for
the City to have conditioned renewal of the franchise upon Golden
State's demonstration that it could provide sufficient service to meet
the City's needs despite the strike, perhaps by hiring replacements.
/20/ This of course could have had an effect on the bargaining process
between employer and union, but it would not have directly interfered
with Golden State's freedom to rely on its federally protected right
to attempt to last out the strike.  A finding of preemption under such
circumstances would be difficult to support:  the preemption doctrine
does not grant federal courts a license to engage in substantive due
process review of the desirability of local regulations of traditional
local concerns merely because the affected parties are involved in a
collective bargaining dispute.

   The facts appear to be otherwise, however.  Both courts below found
that the City had refused to renew Golden State's franchise unless the
employer settled its labor dispute.  They also found that this refusal
had a significant impact on the economic balance of power between the
employer and its union.  See page 5, supra.  Thus, the City's actions
appear directly to have regulated Golden State's exercise of its
federally protected right to rely on its economic power to last out
the strike.  If so, its action must be preempted under Machinists (see
also note 27, infra).

   The court of appeals' distinction (Pet. App. 8a) between
"attempt(ing) to dictate terms of the collective bargaining agreement"
and "insist(ing) upon resolution of the dispute as a condition to
franchise renewal" is without substance.  Under Section 8(d) of the
Act, neither the Board nor state and local governments have any more
authority to insist that parties reach an agreement than they do to
order them to agree to specified terms.  See pages 13-15, supra.
Moreover, in this case, the Union had made clear its preference to put
petitioner out of business and to rely on assurances that its members
would be hired by other operators (see page 3, supra).  Thus, the
effect and indeed the purpose of the City's coundition was to require
Golden State to agree to the Union's terms if it wanted to keep its
franchise.

   b. However, it is not entirely clear on the state of this record
that the City's action must be deemed to have been preempted under
Machinists.  Congress did not intend to preempt the States from
pursuing legitimate local regulatory interests even when their actions
have an incidental effect on the outcome of collective bargaining
agreements, Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., slip op. 22-32 (state
mandated-benefit law not preempted by NLRA).  Just as "Congress
developed the framework for self-organization and collective
bargaining of the NLRA within the larger body of state law promoting
publis health and safety" (id. at 30), so it must have recognized a
wide legitimate sphere of local action with respect to transportation.
 /21/ Thus, the effect of the City's action on the balance of economic
power, while a significant factor, will not always be sufficient to
mandate preemption in this area (absent direct intrusion into the
labor dispute or bargaining process).  If incidental interference with
a federally protected right has in fact been shown, however, a
presumption of preemption follows, and the burden must rest with the
City to demonstrate a congressional intent to permit its regulation,
rather than the other way around.  /22/

   The Court has struggled before with such an inquiry, without
offering definitive guideposts for analysis.  See New York Tel. Co. v.
New York Dep't of Labor, 440 U.S. 519 (1979);  note 22, supra.  In
light of the unusual facts of the present case /23/ and its
unsatisfactory procedural posture, /24/ this case does not seem
suitable for a detailed clarification of the law without a more
thoroughgoing analysis by the courts below of the facts and the law as
applied to those facts.  The most important criteria to guide the
analysis seem fairly clear.

   In the absence of express statutory direction, the most effective
way for the City to carry its burden of showing an intent not to
preempt would be for it to point to legislative history showing that
Congress had in fact considered the sort of regulation undertaken and
had intended to permit it, as in New York Telephone (see note 22,
supra).  Failing that (and there is no suggestion of it here), the
City should be required to demonstrate that its action furthered a
legitimate local concern without undue ancillary interference with the
protected labor activities of Golden State.  Congress must be
understood to have intended that states not directly or gratuitously
interfere with labor relations while pursuing other goals.  By the
same token, Congress did not intend in the NLRA to prevent states from
regulating in areas of local concern notwithstanding an accompanying
incidental effect on labor relations.  /25/ See, e.g., Massachusetts
Nurses Ass'n v. Dukakis, 726 F.2d 41, 43 (1st Cir. 1984) (footnote
omitted) (state hospital cost containment law not preempted partly
because the law "affects the labor-management relationship only
indirectly through its regulation of the employers' annual gross
income");  Amalgamated Transit Union v. Byrne, 568 F.2d 1025 (3d Cir.
1977) (en banc) (state not preempted from announcing that it would not
raise a transportation subsidy to cover an uncapped cost-of-living
clause that was the subject of ongoing bargaining).

   3. Judged by these standards, it is plain that summary judgment in
favor of the City was erroneous.  Construing the facts in Golden
State's favor, the City burdened the employer's right under the NLRA
to rely on its own economic strength to last out the strike, and the
City's legitimate concerns for the service provided by and economic
health of its taxicab industry could apparently have been furthered by
routes considerably less restrictive of the employer's collective
bargaining conduct.

   Nor do we believe that summary judgment should be entered for
petitioner on the record as it now stands, adjudicating at this
juncture that the City's action was preempted.  Because of the errors
in the court of appeals' analysis in its two opinions, the factual
record is incomplete in important respects.  First, the courts below
failed fully to analyze the regulatory action taken by the City.
Although the courts found that the City conditioned renewal of the
franchise on settlement on Golden State's labor dispute, it is not
clear whether this condition was imposed by the City Council as part
of its legislative action or whether it refers simply to Golden
State's less formal understanding on the basis of pronouncements of
individual Council members.  Nor is the extent to which this condition
remained in force at the time the Council voted to deny Golden State a
30-day extension of its franchise clear on the record (see note 20,
supra).  These facts may be significant for determinign whether the
City did in fact directly burden Golden State's protected labor
rights.  /26/

   Second, the City has not yet been required to come forward with
evidence explaining what legitimate transportation interests were
served by its actions and the extent to which any incidental
impairment of Golden State's bargaining power was necessary to
accomplish those interests.  While it may be difficult at this stage
to conceive of a permissible construction of the City's regulatory
conduct, which appears to have imposed settlement of the labor dispute
as the sine qua non of franchise renewal, /27/ the City should be
required to make its case in the lower courts.  A generalized
reference to transportation cannot be enough.

                              CONCLUSION

   The judgment of the court of appeals should be vacated and the case
remanded for further proceedings.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Acting Solicitor General

   LAWRENCE G. WALLACE

      Deputy Solicitor General

   BRUCE N. KUHLIK

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   ROSEMARY M. COLLYER

      General Counsel

   JOHN E. HIGGINS, JR.

      Deputy General Counsel

   ROBERT E. ALLEN

      Associate General Counsel

   NORTON J. COME

      Deputy Associate General Counsel

   LINDA SHER

      Assistant General Counsel

   ROBERT C. BELL, JR.

      Attorney National Labor Relations Board

   AUGUST 1985

   /1/ The court of appeals reversed its earlier determination that
transportation activities are matters of local concern that cannot be
preempted under the NLRA (Pet. App. 5a-6a).

   /2/ Judge Norris concurred separately.  Although he "perceive(d) *
* * serious deficiencies" in the majority's preemption analysis (Pet.
App. 10a. n.1), he concluded that there was no evidence that the
City's actions had an impermissible purpose or effect (id. at 10a).

   /3/ See, e.g., Garner v. Teamsters Local Union No. 776, 346 U.S.
485 (1953);  see generally NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp., 301
U.S. 1 (1937).

   /4/ See San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U.S.236
(1959).

   /5/ See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. 7604(e).

   /6/ Certain private actions with respect to labor relations matters
are permissible under Sections 301 and 303 of the Labor-Management
Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 185 and 187.  These Sections do not bear on
the analysis of this case.

   /7/ United Construction Workers v. Laburnum Construction Corp., 347
U.S. 656 (1954).

   /8/ Linn v. United Plant Guard Workers, Local 114, 383 U.S. 53
(1966).

   /9/ Belknap, Inc. v. Hale, 463 U.S. 491 (1983).

   /10/ Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, No. 84-325 (June
3, 1985).

   /11/ Massachusetts Nurses Ass'n v. Dukakis, 726 F.2d 41 (1st Cir.
1984).

   /12/ See, e.g., Nash v. Florida Industrial Comm'n, 389 U.S. 235
(1967).

   /13/ See, e.g., Lodge 76, Int'l Ass'n of Machinists v. Wisconsin
Employment Relations Comm'n, 427 U.S. 132 (1976).  The mere fact that
a law is general in scope, however, will not save it from preemption
in appropriate circumstances.  See Amalgamated Ass'n of Street, Elec.
Ry. & Motor Coach Employees v. Lockridge, 403 U.S. 274, 292 (1971);
Garmon 359 U.S. at 244.

   /14/ In New York Tel. Co. v. New York Dep't of Labor, 440 U.S. 519
(1979), for example, although the State's purpose was the general and
acceptable one of ensuring income to unemployed workers, even this
purpose was not sufficeint in itself to avoid preemption in the face
of the seriously unbalancing effect of the unemployment compensation
law as applied to striking workers on the competitive situation of
labor and management:  congressional intent to permit such a law to
stand in the face of this effect was necessary to permit it to stand.
See pages 22-23 note 22, infra.

   /15/ Amalgamated Ass'n of Street, Elec. Ry. & Motor Coach Employees
v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Board, 340 U.S. 383 (1951).

   /16/ NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Tel. Co., 304 U.S. 333 (1938).

   /17/ Although Machinists and Morton addressed preemption of state
regulation of union and employee activities, it is clear that resort
to economic strength of self-help (such as hiring replacement workers)
is a right of an employer as well as of its employees.  Thus,
"(w)hether self-help economic activities are employed by employer or
union, the crucial inquiry regarding preemption is the same:  whether
'the exercise of * * * state authority to curtail or entirely prohibit
self-help would frustrate effective implementation of the Act's
process()'" of free collective bargaining.  Machinists, 427 U.S. at
147-148, quoting Brotherhood of R.R. Trainmen v. Jacksonville Terminal
Co., 394 U.S. 369, 380 (1969).

   /18/ As Metropolitan Life Ins. Co makes clear (slip op. 24 n.27),
the distinction between those rights that Congress affirmatively
protected in the NLRA and those activities that it intended to be left
unregulated is irrelevant in this context.  The determinative factor
is Congress's intent, not how it expressed that intent:  "'(T)he
failure of Congress to prohibit certain conduct warrant(s a) negative
inference that it was deemed proper, indeed desirable * * * to be left
for the free play of contending economic forces.'" Machinists, 427
U.S. at 140 n.4, quoting Lesnick, Preemption Reconsidered:  The
Apparent Reaffirmation of Garmon, 72 Colum. L. Rev. 469, 478 (1972).

   /19/ It is irrelevant the court of appeals' approach is predicated
on the "peripheral concern" (see Pet. App. 4a) or the "local interest"
(see id. at 21a) exceptions to Garmon preemption.  Whether
transportation is viewed as peripheral to the NLRA or as an important
local interest, the court of appeals' approach is fundamentally flawed
because it fails accurately to assess Congress's intent.  The court of
appeals "confuse(d) preemption which is based on actual federal
protection of the conduct at issue from that which is based on the
primary jurisdiction of the National Labor Relations Board" (Brown,
slip op. 10).

   /20/ Similarly, the City could have concluded that the strike
demonstrated that the additional service represented by Golden State's
fleet was not necessary to provide an adequate level of taxicab
service and that reducing the number of taxicabs by that amount would
improve the industry's economic health.  Conditioning renewal of the
franchise on settlement of the labor dispute (if that is in fact what
happened), however, would seem to belie this goal:  if the additional
taxi service were in fact unnecessary, settlement of the labor dispute
would have been irrelevant.  Moreover, Golden State could not be
penalized by the City for its involvement in a labor dispute by
discriminatory termination of its franchise.  Whether the City
subsequently awarded Golden State's franchise to another operator or
renewed other franchises would be relevant to these inquiries;  the
courts below, however, did not make findings in this regard.

   /21/ For example, a City's regulation of the number of taxicabs on
its streets and of the rates they may charge obviously will have a
significant effect on collective bargaining agreements reached between
employers and drivers, but it can scarcely be contended that such
regulation is therefore preempted by the NLRA.  Cf. Massachusetts
Nursing Ass'n v. Dukakis, 726 F.2d 41 (1st Cir. 1984).

   /22/ See New York Tel. Co. v. New York Dep't of Labor, 440 U.S.
519, 549 (1979) (Blackmun, J., joined by Marshall, J., concurring in
the judgment) (emphasis in original) (under Machinists, "there is
pre-emption unless there is evidence of congressional intent to
tolerate the state practice").  The three dissenting Justices in New
York Telephone agreed that if a state law interferes with conduct that
Congress left unregulated in the NLRA, it is preempted unless Congress
intended otherwise.  See id. at 555-556, 560-561, 566 (Powell, J.,
joined by the Burger, C.J. and Stewart, J., dissenting).  In New York
Telephone, the Court upheld a state law granting unemployment
compensation benefits to striking employees.  The views of the
plurality of three Justices failed to gain the acceptance of a
majority of the Court, and the case was decided on the narrow ground
of Congress's intent with respect to unemployment compensation as
expressed in the legislative histories of the NLRA and the Social
Security Act, which were passed within a short time of one another.
See id. at 540-546 plurality opinion);  id. at 546-547 (Brennan, J.,
concurring in the result);  id at 547-551 (Blackmun, J., concurring in
the judgment).  The case therefore cannot be read as a retreat from
the analysis adopted in Machinists.  To the contrary, a majority of
the Court reaffirmed that analysis.

   /23/ It is rare to see a union that represents the involved
employees attempt to put an employer out of business as was done here,
for the obvious reason that the employees have nothing to gain by
losing their jobs.  Here, however, the Union drivers believed that
they would be hired by whichever operator received Golden State's
franchise after it expired, and they therefore had no incentive to
help their employer to stay in business (see page 3, supra).

   /24/ The case arises on summary judgment and there do not appear to
be factual findings on important issues related to precisely what the
City Council legislatively enacted and the extent to which the City
may have been furthering legitimate regulatory concerns.  See pages
25-26, infra.  For these reasons, it is difficult to identify with
precision a general rule for determining the leeway that Congress
intended to allow states in purusing their regulatory goals while
interfering with rights under the NLRA:  in the absnece of concrete
facts found below, the discussion remains at an unsatisfactorily
abstract level.  We therefore identify the appropriate concerns in
broad outline, rather than attempt to construct a more specific test
for ascertaining congressional intent in this area.  See generally
International Ass'n of Machinists v. Gonzales, 356 U.S. 617, 619
(1958) (Frankfurter, J.) ("The statutory implications concerning what
has been taken from the States and what has been left to them are of a
Delphic nature, to be translated into concreteness by the process of
litigating elucidation.")

   /25/ We do not think that it would be appropriate in the context of
this case to make this standard any more concrete at this stage of the
proceedings (see note 24, supra).  In some instances, Congress may
have intended that states pursue the regulatory alternative with the
very least necessary impact on labor relations.  In other situations,
Congress may have intended the states to have more freedom to
regulate, limited only by the requirement that they not unreasonably
affect labor relations.  It is unnecessary to reach this question in
order to decide this case.

   /26/ While unavowed pressure tactics on the part of a state or
local government might still give rise to preemption in appropriate
circumstances, the inquiry is considerably more complex than where the
official legislative act bears on its face an improper purpose to put
a thumb on the scales of the balancing power between labor and
management.  In identifying precisely what action the City Council
took, it is important to separate the motives of individual Council
members from the effect of the City's actions.  See generally Pacific
Gas & Elec. Co. v. State Energy Resources Conservation & Development
Comm'n, 461 U.S. 190, 216 (1983) ("inquiry into legislative motive is
often an unsatisfactory venture");  United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S.
367, 383 (1968) ("(i)nquiries into (legislative) motives or purposes
are a hazardous matter");  Dean Milk Co. v. City of Madison, 340 U.S.
349, 354 (1951) (effect of state action, not legislative intent, is
determinative under the Commerce Clause).

   /27/ There would be little doublt, for example, of the invalidity
under the NLRA of a general city ordinance or rule specifying that
franchise renewal applications will be denied simply because a labor
dispute is in progress at the time of, or remains unsettled for a
specified period after, expiration of the existing franchise.
