fl-crop-weather
Florida Crop Weather

Week Ending/Released Dates
Week Ending October 15, 2000
Released 4:00 P.M. October 16, 2000

Report Code
FL-WE4200

Weather Summary
Cool and mostly dry weather prevailed at the major stations during the week
of October 8 through 14. Tempera tures averaged from one degree to fifteen
degrees below normal. Nighttime lows varied considerably with western
Panhandle and northern localities reporting 30s, 40s and 50s. Some patchy
frost occurred in northern spots. Elsewhere, lows were mostly in the 60s
and 70s. Most daytime highs were in the 70s and 80s. Most inland areas of
the Peninsula reported no measurable rain for the week. Coastal localities
reported from traces to about a half inch falling.

Field Crops Report
South Peninsula topsoil moisture is adequate to surplus. The topsoil
moisture throughout the rest of the State is short to adequate with
scattered areas of very short or surplus moisture. Cool weather is slowing
the maturity of cotton and peanuts. Cotton harvest is active. The tobacco
markets are closed. The sugarcane and soybean harvest are starting. Haying
is active weather permitting. Armyworms are a problem in some hay fields.
Seventy eight percent of the peanuts for nuts are reported harvested.

Soil Moisture Chart

     Moisture              Topsoil                      Subsoil
     Rating        Last week     This week     Last week      This week

                                         Percent
 Very short                 2              2             2              5
 Short                     13             43            24             25
 Adequate                  73             51            64             60
 Surplus                   12              4            10             10

Livestock Report
Statewide, the condition of range and pasture is fair to good. Pastures are
dry in the northern two-thirds of the State, but the southwest counties
have standing water. In the Panhandle, permanent pasture conditions are
declining seasonally with cooler weather. Winter forage planting was
delayed by dry soils conditions. In the north counties, haying is active.
Cool season forages are being planted. In the central area, ponds and
streams are very low. Grass growth is slowing due to cooler weather and dry
soil. Armyworms and loopers have caused some damage to the hay crop. In the
southwest, the condition of cattle and calves is fair to good. Pastures are
in good condition but have water runoff over the whole area. There are some
pastures with standing water. Statewide, cattle and calves are in fair to
good condition.

Livestock Condition Chart
                           Range                        Cattle
   Condition
                  Last week      This week     Last week      This week
                                         Percent
 Very poor                  0              0             0              0
 Poor                       5              5             0              0
 Fair                      30             35            20             30
 Good                      65             60            80             70
 Excellent                  0              0             0              0

Fruit Report
Temperatures this week were the coolest of the new citrus season. However,
there was very little if any rain in virtually all citrus producing
counties. Surface soil moisture is getting short in most areas, therefore
growers are irrigating to prevent wilt and also to help increase fruit
sizes. New growth is slowing due to the cooler nighttime temperatures and
the decrease in weekly rainfall. New crop fruit continues to make good
progress with most early fruit showing excellent on-tree color break. There
is some fruit splitting as a result of the late September and early October
rains. Fresh fruit harvesting crews are actively moving Navels, Hamlins and
Ambersweet oranges, white and colored grapefruit and early tangerines to
the packing houses. There are a few juice plants open and receiving packing
house eliminations.

    Caretakers are cutting cover crops that have made advanced growth with
the help of the late September rains. Several growers are applying their
last sprays prior to the winter season. Hedging, topping and burning of
grove debris continues in some of the southern groves.

                   Estimated boxes harvested week ended
                Crop                   Oct 1       Oct 8        Oct 15

 Navel oranges                            5,000       36,000       60,000
 Early & Mid oranges
   including Ambersweet                  13,000       48,000       91,000
 All grapefruit                          20,000      140,000      260,000
 Tangerines                              44,000       86,000      124,000
 K-Early Citrus Fruit                         0            0        2,000

Vegetable Report
The cool temperatures did no significant damage to tomatoes in the Quincy
region. Field activity resumed in Dade County as the ground dried out from
recent heavy rainfall. Bell pepper picking started in the East Coast
region. Cucumber and pickle harvesting began in the West Central area.
Other vegetables available include watermelons, squash and okra.

SNAP BEANS: Dade--Crop condition improved as fields dried out. Harvesting
is expected to begin by mid-November. West Central--The crop is in good
condition. Planting is finished. Southwest--Condition is rated fair to
good. Planting remains steady. East Coast--Crop condition is fair to good.
Pin beans are forming on oldest plants. Recent winds and rain caused some
bloom drop. Recent seedings germinated well. Picking is expected to start
in about ten to fourteen days.

CABBAGE: Dade--Planting is starting. Weather is right for a good stand.
West Central--Planting is starting. Crop condition is good. Growth and
development are normal. Hastings--Growers are planting. The crop is in good
condition. Growth and development are normal. Central--The crop is making
good growth.

SWEET CORN: Zellwood--Picking is beginning. Everglades--Crop condition
remains mostly good. Picking is expected to begin in November.
Southwest--The crop remains in fair to good condition. East Coast--Crop
condition is mostly fair to good. Field activities resumed as fields dried
out.

CUCUMBERS, Fresh Market: West Central--Planting is complete. Crop condition
is good. Growth and development are normal. Harvest is starting. Fruit
quality is fair to good. Fruit size is medium to large. Color is good. East
Coast--Oldest plantings are forming runners and beginning to show blooms.
Thinning is active in the young crop. Germination is mostly good for recent
seeding. Planting continues for the fall crop. Southwest--Planting is
active. Crop condition is fair to good. Growth and development are normal.

PICKLES: West Central--Crop condition is good. Growth and development are
normal. Harvest is starting. Fruit quality is fair to good. Fruit size is
normal. Central--Harvest is active. Crop is making good progress. Growth
and development are normal.

EGGPLANT: East Coast--The crop is in mostly good condition. Recent
transplants are making a good start. Oldest plants are blooming and setting
fruit. West Central--Crop condition remains fair to good. Southwest--The
crop is in fair to good condition. Planting of a small acreage remains
steady. Dade--Crop condition is good. Blooming is increasing. Staking
remains active.

ENDIVE/ESCAROLE: Everglades--Planting continues.

LETTUCE: Everglades--Planting remains active.

OKRA: Dade--The crop is in very good condition. Growers are starting to
harvest fall acreage. Quality and yield are good.

BELL PEPPERS: Southwest--The crop is in fair to good condition. Planting is
steady. West Central--Crop condition is fair to good. Planting is virtually
finished. East Coast--Plant growth and fruit development are fair to good.
Recent winds and rain increased bloom and fruit drop which reduced yield
prospects. Picking is underway with a very light volume available. Workers
leveled ground and laid plastic as scheduled. Spraying for the control of
disease and insects is active.

HOT PEPPERS: East Coast--Harvesting of a light volume started. Quality is
mostly good. Southwest--The crop is in fair to good condition. Planting is
steady.

POTATOES: West Central--Crop condition is good. Dade--Wet ground delayed
field preparations for planting.

RADISHES: Everglades, Lake Placid--Planting is active.

SQUASH: East Coast--Recent heavy rain reduced yield prospects. Harvesting
continues with a light volume available. Quality is mostly good for fancy
grades. Southwest--The crop is in fair to good condition. Planting remains
steady. West Central--Condition is fair to good.
STRAWBERRIES: Plant City--Transplanting continues. Harvesting is expected
to begin in late November. Palmetto-Ruskin--The crop remains in good
condition. Transplanting is steady. Picking is expected to start about
early November.

TOMATOES: Quincy--Cool temperatures slowed fruit development. Picking is
active. East Coast--The crop is in fair to mostly good condition. Fruit
maturation is increasing. Picking is expected to begin over the next two to
three weeks. Transplanting remains active. Palmetto-Ruskin--The crop is in
fair to good condition. Fruit set and sizing are fair. Picking is expected
to start over the next five to ten days. Spraying for the control of
disease and insects remains active. Southwest--Crop condition is fair to
good. Fruit sizing is good. Planting is on schedule. Recent strong winds
and heavy rains increased bloom loss and fruit drop. Spraying for the
control of insects and disease is active. Dade--Crop condition is fair.
Transplanting is increasing slowly. Some plants in low spots recently
flooded were reset. Workers are making ties on oldest plants. Spraying for
the prevention of disease is active.

CHERRY TOMATOES: Palmetto-Ruskin--The crop remains in fair to good
condition. Harvesting is getting underway. Southwest-- Condition is rated
fair to good. Transplanting remains steady.

PLUM TOMATOES: Palmetto-Ruskin--Condition is fair to good. Harvesting is
expected to begin within the next ten to fourteen days. Southwest--The crop
is in fair to good condition. Planting remains steady.

WATERMELONS: Palmetto-Ruskin--Crop condition is fair to good. Harvesting is
gaining momentum. Quality is fair to good. Sizes are small to medium. Color
is good. Yield is fair to good. Southwest--The crop is in fair to good
condition. Planting of the fall crop is finished.

        To receive this report via e-mail, send an e-mail message to
       nass-state-releases@news.usda.gov with the following message:
  subscribe fl-crop-weather. The report will be e-mailed automatically to
                      your e-mail address each week.
