Emerging Infectious Diseases
[Volume 5 No.2 / March - April 1999]

Dispatches

Evaluating Diagnosis and Treatment of Oral and Esophageal Candidiasis in
Ugandan AIDS Patients

Maurizio Ravera, Alberto Reggiori, Anna Maria Agliata, Roberto Pidoto Rocco

Regional Teaching Hospital, Hoima, Uganda

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
      A randomized cross-over clinical and endoscopic evaluation of
      85 Ugandan patients showed that esophageal candidiasis in AIDS
      patients with oral candidiasis could be managed without
      endoscopy and biopsies. Oral lesions, especially when
      accompanied by esophageal symptoms, were sufficient for
      diagnosis. Miconazole was more effective than nystatin in
      treating esophageal candidiasis and could be a valid
      alternative to more expensive azolic drugs in developing
      countries.

Candidiasis, a well-known opportunistic infection of AIDS patients, is the
leading cause of infectious esophagitis (1,2). Studies show similar
prevalence of Candida esophagitis in AIDS patients in the West (9.1% to
31%) (3-5) and in Africa (7.3% to 27%) (6-7). In most treated patients (80%
to 100%) Candida esophagitis recurs after 3 months (8,9). Nevertheless, in
patients with AIDS, candidiasis generally does not become systemic, and
thus, clinical cure is important (9). Defining the most effective
diagnostic and therapeutic approach to curing Candida esophagitis in AIDS
patients is especially important in developing countries, which often have
limited resources.

Diagnosis of esophageal candidiasis is usually based on the endoscopic
appearance of the typical mucosal lesions and on histopathologic studies
(10-12). Several western studies have shown that the diagnosis of this
disease in AIDS patients can be made on clinical findings alone because the
positive predictive value of esophageal symptoms as indexes of esophageal
infection is 71% to 100% (10,13,14). Such an evaluation has not yet been
made in African AIDS patients.

Several therapeutic regimens have been effective in treating oral and
esophageal candidiasis (8,15-23). For the past decade, oral nystatin
therapy has been considered effective in controlling Candida esophagitis
(11). In tropical countries, the efficacy of nystatin in treating this
disease is not well known, although a recent study in Zaire reported a cure
rate of less than 10% (24). We evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of
esophageal symptoms in predicting Candida esophagitis in Ugandan AIDS
patients with oral candidiasis and compared the effectiveness of miconazole
and nystatin in treating oral and endoscopically proven esophageal
candidiasis in these patients.

The Study

From September 1994 to December 1995, 320 consecutive AIDS patients were
observed at the Gastroenterology Department of Hoima Hospital in Uganda.
Among them, 85 (45 women, 40 men, mean age 27.1, standard deviation [SD]
5.3 years) fulfilled admission criteria: positive HIV test or clinical
diagnosis of AIDS and presence of oral patchy white plaques as markers of
oral candidiasis. The district medical officer and the hospital medical
superintendent granted approval for the study, and informed consent was
obtained from each patient. Patients were considered symptomatic if they
had any of the following symptoms: odinophagia, dysphagia, or retrosternal
burning pain.

All patients were hospitalized, and the upper digestive tract was examined
endoscopically. The diagnosis of esophageal candidiasis was made at the
examination. All patients had the same spectrum of lesions: patchy white
plaques, confluent pseudomembrane, and friable mucosa. Routine
histopathologic assessment was not performed, mainly because of cost.

Patients were randomly assigned to the nystatin or miconazole regimen; a
stratified randomization method was used to balance treatment groups by
esophageal symptoms, age, and sex (Table). Nystatin tablets were given at a
dose of 1,000,000 I.U. every 8 hours for 7 days (according to Uganda
Ministry of Health 1993 National Standard Treatment Guidelines), while
miconazole tablets were administered at a dose of 250 mg every 6 hours for
7 days (25). At a mean follow-up of 7.6 days (SD 0.9), the patients'
symptoms were reassessed, and the upper digestive tract was reexamined
endoscopically. The endoscopist was blind to the treatment used. Patients
given nystatin who still had candidiasis were placed on the miconazole
regimen and tested for candidiasis 1 week later.

 Table. Characteristics of patients participat-  Findings
 ing in the study
                                                 Most (90.8%) (42 female,
 ------------------------------------------------35 male, mean age 28.0 ±

                        No. Mean age     Sex     5.8 years) of the study
                            (yr) (S.D.)  M/F     participants had both
 ------------------------------------------------oral and esophageal
                                                 candidiasis. Forty
 Oral candidiasis       85  24.0 (6.7)   32 / 53 (47.1%) had esophageal
 Esophageal symptoms)   40               17 / 23 symptoms, and all had
  (sup a)                                        esophageal candidiasis at
   Nystatin group       20  23.9 (6.1)   7 / 13  endoscopy. Sensitivity,
   Miconazole group     20  23.7 (6.6)   8 / 12  specificity, and the
 Esophageal candidiasis 77  23.7 (6.4)   27 / 50 positive and negative
   Nystatin group       37  24.2 (6.5)   12 / 22 predictive values of
   Miconazole group     40  23.4 (6.1)   15 / 28 esophageal symptoms as
 ----------------------------------------------- markers of esophageal
 (sup a)Esophageal symptoms are any of the       infection were 83.3%
 following: odinophagia, dysphagia,              (confidence interval [CI]
 retrosternal burning pain.                      69.2 to 92.0), 100% (CI
                                                 88.3 to 100), 100% (CI
                                                 89.1 to 100), and 82.2%
                                                 (CI 67.4 to 91.5),
                                                 respectively.

Esophageal symptoms disappeared in 10 (27.0%) of the 37 patients in the
nystatin group and in 38 (95.0%) of 40 patients in the miconazole group
(Yates chi-square = 34.99, p <0.001). Oral candidiasis was cured in all
patients in both groups; esophageal candidiasis was cured in 8 (21.6%)
patients in the nystatin group and in 37 (92.5%) patients in the miconazole
group (Yates chi-square = 36.89, p <0.001). Of the 29 patients who did not
respond to nystatin, 27 (93.1%) were cured with miconazole (Figure). No
adverse effects were observed in either group.

More than 90% of AIDS patients with oral candidiasis in this study also had
esophageal candidiasis, thus confirming that such an association is also
very strong in Uganda (14,26). A little more than half (51.9%) of 77
patients with esophageal candidiasis also had esophageal symptoms. Our
findings and those of other studies support the observation that esophageal
candidiasis could be suspected if oral thrush is present, especially when
esophageal symptoms are associated (10,14,26,27). Thus, in tropical
countries, endoscopic assessment and biopsies might best be reserved for
patients who have esophageal symptoms after receiving prolonged antifungal
treatment to confirm diagnosis of candidiasis or to determine other
infectious causes of this symptoms (e.g., herpes simplex virus infection,
cytomegalovirus infection, cryptosporidiosis) (2,23).

Although our study was    
not designed to detect 				[fig]
recurrence of             Figure. Esophageal candidiasis treatment flow.
candidiasis, esophageal
candidiasis is likely to recur in AIDS patients within 12 months from any
antifungal treatment; if it does, response to therapy is worse than
response to initial therapy (28). For this reason, as well as the
possibility of resistance to miconazole (sporadic cases have been reported
[29]), more expensive azolic drugs (e.g., fluconazole) should be reserved
for recurrences of the disease; the disease should be treated initially
with less expensive, but more effective drugs (e.g., miconazole).

In sum, AIDS patients with oral candidiasis in countries similar to Uganda
can be managed without endoscopic and bioptic assessments since oral
lesions are typical and a high prevalence of esophageal involvement is
expected (with or without symptoms) (>90% of cases in our study). In our
patients, nystatin had a very low cure rate in the treatment of esophageal
candidiasis in AIDS patients; however, it could still play a role in the
treatment of oral candidiasis, especially in nonimmunocompromised patients,
in whom concomitant esophageal involvement is less common. On the other
hand, miconazole, a medium-priced azolic drug, was very effective and could
be a valid alternative to more expensive azolic drugs in developing
countries.



---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Acknowledgments

      We thank Dr. G. Oundo, medical superintendent, and the staff of Hoima
Hospital.

      This study was funded by International Service Volunteers'
Association, Kampala, Uganda.

      Dr. Ravera is a specialist in gastroenterology and digestive
endoscopy. A researcher at the Italian National Health Institute, he serves
as site coordinator/monitor of the UNAIDS PETRA study at Nsambya Hospital,
Kampala, Uganda. His research interests include gastroenterology,
endoscopy, infectious diseases, and HIV/AIDS.

Address for correspondence: Maurizio Ravera, c/o AVSI P.O. Box 6785,
Kampala, Uganda; fax: 256-41-266967; e-mail: petra@swiftuganda.com.

References

  1. Wilcox CM, Karowe MW. Esophageal infections: etiology, diagnosis and
     management. Gastroenterologist 1994;2:188-206.
  2. Lopez Dupla M, Mora Sanz P, Pintado Garcia V, Valencia Ortega E, Uriol
     PL, Khamashta MA, et al. Clinical, endoscopic, immunologic and
     therapeutic aspects of oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis in HIV
     infected patients: a survey of 114 cases. Am J Gastroenterol
     1992;87:1771-6.
  3. Sirera G, Clotet B, Romeu J. Incidence of opportunistic infections and
     malignancies in AIDS patients from Barcelona according to patients'
     risk behaviour. VII International Conference on AIDS, Florence Jun
     16-21, 1991; M.B.2459 [abstract].
  4. Heise W, Arasteh K, Mostertz P. Gastrointestinal manifestations in
     AIDS. Endoscopic, histological and microbiological aspects. VII
     International Conference on AIDS, Florence Jun 16-21, 1991:2227
     [abstract].
  5. Scevola D. Apparato gastrointestinale. In: Dianzani F, editor. Il
     libro italiano dell'AIDS. Milano: Mc Graw-Hill; 1994. p. 305-12.
  6. Howlett WP, Nkya WM, Mmuni KA, Missalek WR. Neurological disorders in
     AIDS and HIV disease in the northern zone of Tanzania. AIDS
     1989;3:289-96.
  7. Colebunders R, Latif AS. Natural history and clinical presentation of
     HIV-1 infection in adults. AIDS 1991;5 Suppl 1:S103-12.
  8. Smith DE, Midgley J, Allan M, Connolly GM, Gazzard B. Itraconazole
     versus ketoconazole in the treatment of oral and oesophageal
     candidiasis in patients infected with HIV. AIDS 1991;5:1367-71.
  9. Laine L, Bonacini M. Esophageal disease in HIV infection. Arch Intern
     Med 1994;154:1577-82.
 10. Connolly GM, Hawkins D, Harcourt-Webster JN, Parsons PA, Husain OA,
     Gazzard BG. Oesophageal symptoms, their causes, treatment and
     prognosis in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Gut
     1989;30:1033-9.
 11. Mathieson R, Dutta SK. Candida esophagitis. Dig Dis Sci
     1983;28:365-70.
 12. Kodsi BE, Wickremesinghe PC, Kozinn PJ, Iswara K, Golberg PK. Candida
     esophagitis: a prospective study of 27 cases. Gastroenterology
     1976;71:715-9.
 13. Bonacini M, Young T, Laine L. The causes of esophageal symptoms in
     human immunodeficiency virus infection. A prospective study of 110
     patients. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:1567-72.
 14. Bianchi Porro G, Parente F, Cernuschi M. The diagnosis of oesophageal
     candidiasis in patients with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome:
     is endoscopy always necessary? Am J Gastroenterol 1989;84:143-6.
 15. Pons V, Greenspan D, Debruin M. Therapy for oropharyngeal candidiasis
     in HIV infected patients: a randomized, prospective multicenter study
     group. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 1993;6:1311-6.
 16. Greenspan D. Treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in HIV positive
     patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994;31:S51-5.
 17. Hernandez Sampelayo T. Fluconazole versus ketoconazole in the
     treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in HIV infected children
     multicenter study group. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis
     1994;13:340-4.
 18. Gil A, Lavilla P, Lopez Dupla M, Valencia E, Pintado V, Khamashta M,
     et al. Treatment of esophageal candidiasis with fluconazole in
     acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Comparative study of 2 therapeutic
     schemes. Med Clin (Barc) 1992;98:612-7.
 19. Berger TG. Treatment of bacterial, fungal and parasitic infections in
     the HIV infected host. Seminar in Dermatology 1993;12:296-300.
 20. Sutton FM, Graham DY, Goodgame RW. Infectious esophagitis.
     Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am 1994;4:713-29.
 21. Soubry R, Clerinx J, Banyangiliki V. Comparison of itraconazole oral
     solution and fluconazole capsules in the treatment of oral and
     esophageal candidiasis in HIV infected patients. Preliminary results.
     VII International Conference on AIDS, Florence 16-21 Jun, 1991: M.B.
     2201 [abstract].
 22. De Wit S. Comparison of fluconazole and ketoconazole for oropharyngeal
     candidiasis in AIDS. Lancet 1989;1:746-8.
 23. Laine L, Dretler RH, Conteas CN, Tuazon C, Koster FM, Sattler F, et
     al. Fluconazole compared with ketoconazole for the treatment of
     candida esophagitis in AIDS. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med
     1992;117:655-60.
 24. Nyst MJ, Perriens JH, Kimputu L, Lumbila M, Nelson AM, Piot P. Gentian
     violet, ketoconazole and nystatin in oropharyngeal and esophageal
     candidiasis in Zairean AIDS patients. Annales de la Societé Belge de
     Médecine Tropicale 1992;72:45-52.
 25. Grahame-Smith DG, Aronson JK. Oxford textbook of clinical pharmacology
     and drug therapy. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press Inc.;
     1992. p. 559.
 26. Raufman JP, Rosenthal LE. Oral candidiasis as a marker for esophageal
     candidiasis in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med
     1986;104:54-8.
 27. Bassetti D, Canessa A. Micosi. In: Ferdinando Dianzani, editor. Il
     libro italiano dell'AIDS. Milano: Mc Graw-Hill; 1994. p. 224-8.
 28. Parente F, Cerruschi M, Rizzardini G, Lazzarin A, Valsecchi L, Bianchi
     Porro G. Opportunistic infections of the esophagus not responding to
     oral systemic antifungals in patients with AIDS: their frequency and
     treatment. Am J Gastroenterol 1991;86:1729-34.
 29. Holt RJ, Azmi A. Miconazole resistant candida. Lancet 1978;1:50-1.

Emerging Infectious Diseases
National Center for Infectious Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA

URL: ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/EID/vol5no2/ascii/ravera.txt

Please note that figures and equations are not available in ASCII format; 
their placement within the text is noted by [fig] and [eq], respectively. 
Greek symbols are spelled out. The following codes are used: 
(ft) for footnote; (sup) for superscript; (sub) for subscript; 
>/= for greater than or equal to.
