Minutes of the Jan 31, 2003 Tevatron Dept Meeting


1. Roger Dixon was welcomed by the Tev audience at the mtg as new BD
Head. He answered number of questions.

2. Jim Volk reported for the last time as the Tev Coordinator - all
shutdown projects are complete. Tev is cold. Since Thursday Jan 30, Jerry
Annala is the Tev coordinator. Jim will collect jobs/requsets for the next
shutdown.  Once again, we thank Jim for job well done.

3. Other tunnel news: a) Bruce said that C0 vacuum is OK but a bit worse
than before shutdown at the downstream (MI) end (1e-8), F0 vacuum is worse
(2e-8) even with A1/P1 line valves closed but Lamberstons are still
cooling off, B0-OK, B48-OK, E17-OK; b) all right with new Schottky's and
Jim S expect some emittance info from them mid-Feb; c) Vladimir explained
minor troubles with TEL - new gun was supposed to give less current than
the old one, but achieved 0.45A peak was not enough for cleaning and TEL
guys decided to replace high-power resistor in the HV modulator that
should guarantee peak current above 0.5A for cleaning - to be installed
Saturday; d) Fritz on BPM PSD boxes: boxes disconnected as planned, there
were some troubles with termination of pbar ends of the pick-up but
everything is fixed now, pbar ends of A15 BPMs cabled for Andreas e) Bruce
found excessive quad vibrations due to turbopump operation at B37 and F43
- mechanical connections "quad-pump"  removed, 90Hz amplitudes
significantly reduced; f) Jim Volk has shown results of ring wide roll
measurements - which now can be done a fast as in few days with Jostlein
fixture - most magnets rolled in the same direction (inward), some rolls
are large and may require actions.

4. Temir (TD) presented Rf noise measurement results : Rf phase noise goes
up +30dB when cooling water turned on, Rf phase oscillations correlate
with and occure at the same frequency as machanical vibrations of the RF
cavities.  Disconnection of the water heaters did help at the test cavity
(-8dB at 32 Hz).

5. Sasha Drozhdin and Mike Church suggested to install a vert collimator
at A48 to eliminate (>100 fold suppression of energy deposition) CDF
detector damage due to p- or pbar-kicker prefire. In general the proposal
looks OK, but Dean mentioned other effects/circumstances that should
be considered as well: halo background at the CDF, rad-noise on Roman
pots, pbar background, pbar/p removal, etc. Investigation of all that is
going to be done by Ron and people from Mike Albrow's topic group. Alvin
mentioned that projects like that should not be stopped completely at the
level of groups/departments due to resources consideration and must "leak"
to upper management.  (Alvin was referring to a modification of the abort kickers
to use a resonant-charging system.)

6. Valery has demonstrated that though the Tev bunch profile in time looks
bell-like, in the longitudinal action plane it is almost rectangular (i.e.
RF bucket filled fully and uniformly). Andreas mentioned bunch tomography
at CERN and Mike Syphers responded that Leo Michelotti already has tool
for doing similar analysis. Years ago Tan published a paper on phase space
recosntruction from profile by reverse matrix approach.  Independently of
data processing we need a better diagnostics of the tails of longitudinal
bunch distribution. Alvin might have some results on the
"SBD-without-long-cables" by next week.



(Recorded by V. Shiltsev, edited by R. Moore)
