[Federal Register: September 8, 1998 (Volume 63, Number 173)]
[Proposed Rules]
[Page 47601-47650]
From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:fr08se98-35]

[[pp. 47601-47650]] Medicare Program; Prospective Payment System for Hospital
Outpatient Services

[[Continued from page 47600]]

[[Page 47601]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP08SE98.002

[[Page 47602]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP08SE98.003

[[Page 47603]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP08SE98.004

[[Page 47604]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP08SE98.005

BILLING CODE 4120-01-C

[[Page 47605]]

XI. Delay in Implementation Date

    Like other public and private organizations that depend upon the
smooth functioning of computer systems, the Medicare program faces the
challenge making changes to assure that computers can recognize dates
in the year 2000 and later. Computer programming, which has commonly
employed only two digits to record the year in the date for
transactions and other entries, will not be able to distinguish the
year 2000 from the year 1900 without reprogramming. Such confusion in
the context of Medicare enrollment and claims processing could create
massive errors, as computers could mistakenly determine that
beneficiaries are not eligible for benefits or that services were
rendered before the effective date of benefit provisions.
    For Medicare, achieving year 2000 (Y2K) compliance involves
renovating all computer and information systems. The year 2000
especially affects HCFA because of our extensive reliance on multiple
computer systems. More than 183 systems are used in administering the
Medicare and Medicaid programs, and 98 of these are considered
``mission critical'' for establishing beneficiary eligibility and
making payments to providers, plans, and states. Medicare is the most
automated health care payer in the country. The Medicare program
processes nearly one billion claims each year, or about 17 million
transactions each week. Fully 98 percent of inpatient hospital and
other Medicare Part A claims are processed electronically, as are 85
percent of physician and other Medicare Part B claims.
    The renovation process is complicated because each piece in the
systems used by Medicare, its 60-plus claims processing contractors,
interfaces with state Medicaid programs, and some 1.6 million providers
must be thoroughly reviewed and renovated by those responsible for each
particular system. Programs must be tested, both alone and for the
complicated interfaces among them. To fix only the Medicare systems, 49
million lines of code must be renovated. All Medicare-specific software
must be renovated, and tested to assure that it continues to work with
new versions of vendor-supplied software, including operating systems
that drive the hardware. Some hardware must be upgraded, and our
telecommunications equipment and software must be compliant. We must
assure that all data exchanges with thousands of partners are
compliant. Testing of year 2000 changes presents a far greater burden
than testing of routine system changes because we must test multiple
times on a range of different dates. For example, February 29, 2000 and
March 1, 2000 must both be tested because CY 2000 is a leap year.
    Because this process is necessary to keep program payments going
out to beneficiaries and providers, year 2000 work must take precedence
over other projects that require systems changes, including some
Balanced Budget Act provisions. The Y2K project must be completed
before other projects simply because activity on these other projects
would divert resources from the Y2K project and could even compromise
the effort to assure Y2K compliance if implemented in tandem. Many
other private and public organizations, including most major insurance
companies, have reached the same conclusion and are halting other
projects involving information technology changes to clear the decks
for the year 2000.
    HCFA's independent year 2000 verification and validation
contractor, Intermetrics, has advised the agency to delay all projects
that could interfere with year 2000 work. Intermetrics specifically
advised the agency to ``seek necessary relief from Congressional
mandates, system transitions and version releases to allow near-term,
focused attention to achieving Y2K compliant systems.'' This includes
projects that are complex, or which would occur during a critical
window between October 1999 and March 2000. Otherwise, they warned,
``many of your most critical system renovations have risk of
significant schedule slippage.''
    Implementation of outpatient PPS is one of the projects that must
be delayed by the year 2000 system renovations, because it requires
massive system changes. Major contractor systems will be affected: the
Fiscal Intermediary Standard Systems (FISS), the Arkansas Part A
Standard System (APASS), the Common Working File (CWF), the Outpatient
Code Editor (OCE), and the various systems operated by Fiscal
Intermediaries and their corporate entities. Several HCFA systems will
also be affected, including the National Claims History (NCH), the
Provider Statistical & Reimbursement System (PS&R), and the Electronic
Data Interchange (EDI). The scope of the required changes is also
substantial. Among the required changes are:
    <bullet> Expansion of the claim record of FISS, APASS, EDI, NCH and
CWF to accept and retain specific information related to how a service
is being paid or why it's denied.
    <bullet> Conversion of all claims history to correspond with
expanded format.
    <bullet> Rewriting the program for FISS to process claims using
line item dates of service.
    <bullet> Rewriting the program for CWF to accept non covered
charges by claim and line item.
    <bullet> Developing, installing and testing an outpatient PRICER
which determines payment amounts based on the HCFA Common Procedural
Codes (HCPCS).
    <bullet> Revision of interfaces with the fiscal intermediaries,
providers, Billing Agents, EDI, OCE, PS&R and NCH and create an
interface for PRICER.
    <bullet> Developing, installing and testing a program to calculate
the variable co-insurance per payment code grouping for each provider
who elects to accept a reduced co-insurance.
    <bullet> Revision of all claims processing output and interfaces
including: Medicare Summary Notices (MSN), Beneficiary Denial Letters
(BDL), Explanation of Medicare Benefits (EOMB), Notice of Utilization
(NOU), Remittance Advice (RA).
    The consequence of all these required changes to basic systems will
be to change the entire way Fiscal Intermediaries process and pay
hospital outpatient and community mental health center claims. There is
also a major impact on the many systems that are required to receive
this revised output. Changes of this magnitude require massive testing
by all of the systems maintainers as well as each Fiscal Intermediary.
Additionally, the impact on the Fiscal Intermediary systems has a
domino effect. The intermediaries are doing business for Medicare under
the auspices of their respective corporate entities. These corporate
systems must be modified to accept, edit and relay the new information
necessary to process outpatient PPS claims. They are also working
toward becoming millennium compliant and competing for the same
resources to scope, program, test and rework these changes, as well as
the multitude of other BBA changes and Y2K. In the light of this, HCFA
has no choice but to suspend implementing such massive change while the
Intermediaries, their respective corporate entities, the standard
systems maintainers as well as the provider community are working
diligently to become Y2K compliant. It would be irresponsible to
continue activity that would create a real danger that basic enrollment
and claims processing activities will be disrupted, with far worse
consequences for providers and beneficiaries than delay in
implementation of outpatient PPS will cause.

[[Page 47606]]

    We analyzed whether existing systems could be used to mimic
processing of bills under the outpatient PPS. In every case, there were
insuperable obstacles. In no case, for example, could these other
systems compute the coinsurance correctly: the other available systems
compute coinsurance as 20 percent of charges or 20 percent of a fee
schedule amount. We have therefore reluctantly concluded that there is
no alternative to a delay in implementation. As previously noted, the
outpatient PPS will be implemented as soon as possible after January 1,
2000. A notice of the anticipated implementation date will be published
in the Federal Register at least 90 days in advance.
    We expect that there will be no negative impact on hospitals
generally from the delay in implementation. The effect on individual
hospitals will, of course, vary depending on how their current cost-
based reimbursement compares to the total payments they would receive
under the proposed system. Hospitals altogether should receive about
the same level of Medicare program payments under the existing payment
system, as they would have received in program payments under the
outpatient PPS. When beneficiary coinsurance is taken into account, we
expect that hospitals generally will receive about 3.8 percent more in
total payments under the existing payment system, than they would have
received in total payments under the outpatient PPS. We should note
that payment rates will be established at the level they would have
been if the PPS had been implemented on January 1, 1999.
    The major impact of the delay in implementation will be on
beneficiaries who will continue to pay coinsurance based on 20 percent
of the hospital's charges. In the aggregate, we estimate beneficiary
coinsurance would have been 6.9 percent lower under the outpatient
prospective payment system in 1999 than under the current system. Under
the prospective payment system, coinsurance will be based on our
estimate of the median coinsurance amount for each APC under the
current system in 1999. In the aggregate, estimated median coinsurance
amounts are 6.9 percent lower than estimated mean coinsurance amounts
for each APC. The actual impact will depend on the extent to which
hospitals raise their charges in 1999. For example, the impact on
beneficiaries would be moderated if hospitals show restraint in
increasing charges (which have been increasing more rapidly than cost).
We will actively encourage hospitals to voluntarily restrain from
increasing their current charges. The actual impact on a given
beneficiary will also depend on the hospital's charge structure
relative to national charge levels. A beneficiary receiving services
from a hospital with relatively low charges could be advantaged by the
delay whereas a hospital with relatively high charges would be
disadvantaged by the delay. We note that the impact will not be carried
over to the prospective payment system.

List of Subjects

42 CFR Part 409

    Health facilities, Medicare.

42 CFR Part 410

    Health facilities, Health professions, Kidney diseases,
Laboratories, Medicare, Rural areas, X-rays.

42 CFR Part 411

    Kidney diseases, Medicare, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements.

42 CFR Part 412

    Administrative practice and procedure, Health facilities, Medicare,
Puerto Rico, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

42 CFR Part 413

    Health facilities, Kidney diseases, Medicare, Puerto Rico,
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

42 CFR Part 419

    Health facilities, Hospitals, Medicare.

42 CFR Part 489

    Health facilities, Medicare, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements.

42 CFR Part 498

    Administrative practice and procedure, Health facilities, Health
professions, Medicare, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

42 CFR Part 1003

    Administrative practice and procedure, Archives and records, grant
program--social programs, Maternal and Child Health, Medicaid,
Medicare, Penalties.

    For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 42 CFR chapters IV and V
would be amended as follows:

PART 409--HOSPITAL INSURANCE BENEFITS

    A. Part 409 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 409 continues to read as
follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102 and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1302 and 1395(hh)).

Subpart B--Inpatient Hospital Services and Inpatient Critical
Access Hospital Services

    2. In Sec. 409.10, paragraph (b) is revised to read as follows:

Sec. 409.10  Included services.

* * * * *
    (b) Inpatient hospital services does not include the following
types of services:
    (1) Post-hospital SNF care, as described in Sec. 409.20, furnished
by a hospital or a critical access hospital that has a swing-bed
approval.
    (2) Nursing facility services, described in Sec. 440.155 of this
chapter, that may be furnished as a Medicaid service under title XIX of
the Act in a swing-bed hospital that has an approval to furnish nursing
facility services.
    (3) Physician services that meet the requirements of
Sec. 415.102(a) of this chapter for payment on a fee schedule basis.
    (4) Physician assistant services, as defined in section
1861(s)(2)(K)(i) of the Act.
    (5) Nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services, as
defined in section 1861(s)(2)(K)(ii) of the Act.
    (6) Certified nurse mid-wife services, as defined in section
1861(gg) of the Act.
    (7) Qualified psychologist services, as defined in section 1861(ii)
of the Act.
    (8) Services of an anesthetist, as defined in Sec. 410.69 of this
chapter.

PART 410--SUPPLEMENTARY MEDICAL INSURANCE (SMI) BENEFITS

    B. Part 410 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 410 continues to read as
follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102 and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1302 and 1395(hh)), unless otherwise indicated.

Subpart A--General Provisions

    2. In Sec. 410.2, the following definitions are added in
alphabetical order to read as follows:

Sec. 410.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part--
* * * * *
    Encounter means a direct personal contact between a patient and a
physician, or other person who is authorized by State licensure law
and, if applicable, by hospital or CAH staff bylaws, to order or
furnish hospital services for diagnosis or treatment of the patient.
* * * * *

[[Page 47607]]

    Outpatient means a person who has not been admitted as an inpatient
but who is registered on the hospital or CAH records as an outpatient
and receives services (rather than supplies alone) directly from the
hospital or CAH.
* * * * *

Subpart B--Medical and Other Health Services

    3. In Sec. 410.27, the section heading is revised, the introductory
text to paragraph (a) is revised, the introductory text to paragraph
(a)(1) is republished, and new paragraphs (a)(1)(iii), (e), and (f) are
added to read as follows:

Sec. 410.27  Outpatient hospital services and supplies incident to a
physician service: Conditions.

    (a) Medicare Part B pays for hospital services and supplies
furnished incident to a physician service to outpatients, including
drugs and biologicals that cannot be self-administered, if--
    (1) They are furnished--
* * * * *
    (iii) In the hospital or at a location (other than an RHC or an
FQHC) that HCFA designates as qualifying as a department of a provider
under Sec. 413.65 of this chapter; and
* * * * *
    (e) Services furnished by an entity other than the hospital are
subject to the limitations specified in Sec. 410.39(a).
    (f) Services furnished at a location (other than an RHC or an FQHC)
that HCFA designates as having provider-based status under Sec. 413.65
of this chapter must be under the direct supervision of a physician as
defined in Sec. 410.32(b)(3)(ii).
    4. In Sec. 410.28, paragraph (a)(4) is removed, paragraph (c) is
redesignated as paragraph (d), and new paragraphs (c) and (e) are added
to read as follows:

Sec. 410.28  Hospital or CAH diagnostic services furnished to
outpatients: Conditions.

* * * * *
    (c) Diagnostic services furnished by an entity other than the
hospital or CAH are subject to the limitations specified in
Sec. 410.39(a).
* * * * *
    (e) Medicare Part B makes payment under section 1833(t) of the Act
for diagnostic tests performed at a facility (other than an RHC or an
FQHC) that HCFA designates as having provider-based status only when
the diagnostic tests are furnished under the appropriate level of
physician supervision specified by HCFA in accordance with the
definitions in Sec. 410.32(b)(3)(i), (b)(3)(ii), and (b)(3)(iii).
    5. A new Sec. 410.39 is added to read as follows:

Sec. 410.39  Limitations on coverage of certain services furnished to
hospital outpatients.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, Medicare
Part B does not pay for any item or service that is furnished to a
hospital outpatient (as defined in Sec. 410.2) during an encounter (as
defined in Sec. 410.2) by an entity other than the hospital unless the
hospital has an arrangement (as defined in Sec. 409.3 of this chapter)
with that entity to furnish that particular service to its patients.
    (b) As used in paragraph (a) of this section, the term ``hospital''
includes a CAH.
    (c) The limitations stated in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
section do not apply to the following services:
    (1) Physician services that meet the requirements of
Sec. 415.102(a) of this chapter for payment on a fee schedule basis.
    (2) Physician assistant services, as defined in section
1861(s)(2)(K)(i) of the Act.
    (3) Nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services, as
defined in section 1861(s)(2)(K)(ii) of the Act.
    (4) Certified nurse mid-wife services, as defined in section
1861(gg) of the Act.
    (5) Qualified psychologist services, as defined in section 1861(ii)
of the Act.
    (6) Services of an anesthetist, as defined in Sec. 410.69.

PART 411--EXCLUSIONS FROM MEDICARE AND LIMITATIONS ON MEDICARE
PAYMENT

    C. Part 411 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 411 continues to read as
follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102 and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1302 and 1395(hh)).

Subpart A--General Exclusions and Exclusion of Particular Services

    2. In Sec. 411.15, the introductory text is republished; the
section heading to paragraph (m) is revised; paragraph (m)(1) is
revised; the introductory text to paragraph (m)(2) is republished;
paragraphs (m)(2)(iii), (m)(2)(iv), and (m)(2)(v) are redesignated as
paragraphs (m)(2)(iv), (m)(2)(v), and (m)(2)(vi), respectively; and new
paragraphs (m)(2)(iii) and (m)(3) are added to read as follows:

Sec. 411.15  Particular services excluded from coverage.

    The following services are excluded from coverage.
* * * * *
    (m) Services to hospital patients--(1) Basic rule. Except as
provided in paragraph (m)(2) of this section, any service furnished to
an inpatient of a hospital or to a hospital outpatient (as defined in
Sec. 410.2 of this chapter) during an encounter (as defined in
Sec. 410.2 of this chapter) by an entity other than the hospital,
unless the hospital has an arrangement (as defined in Sec. 409.3 of
this chapter) with that entity to furnish that particular service to
the hospital's patients. (As used in this paragraph (m)(1), the term
``hospital'' includes a CAH.)
    (2) Exceptions. The following services are not excluded from
coverage:
* * * * *
    (iii) Nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services, as
defined in section 1861(s)(2)(K)(ii) of the Act.
* * * * *
    (3) Scope of exclusion. Services subject to exclusion under the
provisions of this paragraph (m) include, but are not limited to,
clinical laboratory services; pacemakers and other prostheses and
prosthetic devices (other than dental) that replace all or part of an
internal body organ (for example, intraocular lenses); artificial
limbs, knees, and hips; equipment and supplies covered under the
prosthetic device benefits; and services incident to a physician
service.
* * * * *

PART 412--PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEMS FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL
SERVICES

    D. Part 412 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 412 continues to read as
follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102 and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1302 and 1395(hh)).

Subpart C--Conditions for Payment Under the Prospective Payment
Systems for Inpatient Operating Costs and Inpatient Capital-Related
Costs

    2. In Sec. 412.50, paragraphs (a) and (b) are revised to read as
follows:

Sec. 412.50  Furnishing of inpatient hospital services directly or
under arrangements.

    (a) The applicable payments made under the prospective payment
systems, as described in subparts H and M of this part, are payment in
full for all inpatient hospital services, as defined in Sec. 409.10

[[Page 47608]]

of this chapter. Inpatient hospital services do not include the
following types of services:
    (1) Physician services that meet the requirements of
Sec. 415.102(a) of this chapter for payment on a fee schedule basis.
    (2) Physician assistant services, as defined in section
1861(s)(2)(K)(i) of the Act.
    (3) Nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services, as
defined in section 1861(s)(2)(K)(ii) of the Act.
    (4) Certified nurse mid-wife services, as defined in section
1861(gg) of the Act.
    (5) Qualified psychologist services, as defined in section 1861(ii)
of the Act.
    (6) Services of an anesthetist, as defined in Sec. 410.69 of this
chapter.
    (b) HCFA does not pay any provider or supplier other than the
hospital for services furnished to a beneficiary who is an inpatient,
except for the services described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6)
of this section.
* * * * *

PART 413--PRINCIPLES OF REASONABLE COST REIMBURSEMENT; PAYMENT FOR
END-STAGE RENAL DISEASE SERVICES; OPTIONAL PROSPECTIVELY DETERMINED
PAYMENT RATES FOR SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES

    E. Part 413 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 413 continues to read as
follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102, 1861(v)(1)(A), and 1871 of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1302, 1395x(v)(1)(A), and 1395hh).

Subpart A--Introduction and General Rules

Sec. 413.1  [Amended]

    2. In Sec. 413.1, paragraph (a)(2)(viii) is removed.

Subpart B--Accounting Records and Reports

    3. In Sec. 413.24, the heading to paragraph (d) is published, and a
new paragraph (d)(6) is added to read as follows:

Sec. 413.24  Adequate cost data and cost finding.

* * * * *
    (d) Cost finding methods. * * *
    (6) Management contracts. (i) If the main provider purchases
services for a department of the provider or a provider-based entity
through a management contract or otherwise directly assigns costs to
the department or entity, the like costs of the main provider must be
carved out to ensure that they are not allocated to the department of
the provider or provider-based entity. However, if the like costs of
the main provider cannot be separately identified, the costs of the
services purchased through a management contract must be included in
the main provider's administrative and general costs and allocated
among the provider's overall statistics.
    (ii) Costs of free-standing entities may not be shown in the
provider's trial balance for purposes of stepping down overhead costs
to such entities. The provider must develop detailed work papers
showing the exact cost of the services (including overhead) provided to
or by the free-standing entity and show those carved out costs as non-
reimbursable cost centers in the provider's trial balance.
* * * * *

Subpart E--Payments to Providers

    4. A new Sec. 413.65 is added to read as follows:

Sec. 413.65  Requirements for a determination that a facility or an
organization is a department of a provider or a provider-based entity.

    (a) Definitions. In this subpart E, unless the context indicates
otherwise--
    Department of a provider means a facility or organization or a
physician office that is either created by, or acquired by, a main
provider for the purpose of furnishing health care services under the
name, ownership, and financial and administrative control of the main
provider, in accordance with the provisions of this section. A
department of a provider may not be licensed to provide health care
services in its own right, and Medicare conditions of participation do
not apply to a department as an independent entity. For purposes of
this part, the term ``department of a provider'' does not include an
RHC or an FQHC.
    Free-standing facility means an entity that furnishes health care
services to Medicare beneficiaries and that is not integrated with any
other entity as a main provider, a department of a provider, or a
provider-based entity.
    Main provider means a provider that either creates, or acquires
ownership of, another entity to deliver additional health care services
under its name, ownership, and financial and administrative control.
    Provider-based entity means a provider of health care services, or
an RHC or an FQHC as defined in Sec. 405.2401(b) of this chapter, that
is either created by, or acquired by, a main provider for the purpose
of furnishing health care services under the name, ownership, and
administrative and financial control of the main provider, in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
    Provider-based status means the relationship between a main
provider and a provider-based entity or a department of a provider,
that complies with the provisions of this section.
    (b) Responsibility for obtaining provider-based determinations. (1)
A facility or organization is not entitled to be treated as provider-
based simply because it or the main provider believe it is provider-
based.
    (2) A provider or a facility or organization must contact HCFA and
the facility or organization must be determined by HCFA to be provider-
based before the main provider begins billing for services of the
facility or organization as if they were furnished by a department of
the provider or provider-based entity, or before it includes costs of
those services on its cost report.
    (3) A facility that is not located on the campus of a hospital and
is used as a site of physician services of the kind ordinarily
furnished in physician offices will be presumed to be a free-standing
facility, unless it is determined by HCFA to have provider-based
status.
    (c) Reporting. (1) A main provider that acquires a facility or
organization for which it wishes to claim provider-based status,
including any physician offices that a hospital wishes to operate as a
hospital outpatient department or clinic, must report its acquisition
of the facility or organization to HCFA and must furnish all
information needed for a determination as to whether the facility or
organization meets the requirements in paragraph (d) of this section
for provider-based status.
    (2) A main provider that has had one or more facilities or
organizations considered provider-based also must report to HCFA any
material change in the relationship between it and any provider-based
facility or organization, such as a change in ownership of the facility
or organization or entry into a new or different management contract
that could affect the provider-based status of the facility or
organization.
    (d) Requirements. An entity must meet the following requirements to
be determined by HCFA to be a provider-based entity or a department of
a provider:
    (1) Licensure. The department of the provider and the main provider
are operated under the same license, except in areas where the State
requires a separate license for the department of

[[Page 47609]]

the provider. If a State health facilities' cost review commission or
other agency that has authority to regulate the rates charged by
hospitals or other providers in a State finds that a particular
facility or organization is not part of a provider, HCFA will determine
that the facility or organization does not have provider-based status.
    (2) Operation under the ownership and control of the main provider.
The facility or organization seeking provider-based status is operated
under the ownership and control of the main provider, as evidenced by
the following:
    (i) The facility or organization is 100 percent owned by the
provider.
    (ii) The main provider and the facility or organization seeking
status as a department of the provider have the same governing body.
    (iii) The facility or organization is operated under the same
organizational documents as the main provider. For example, the
facility or organization seeking provider-based status must be subject
to common bylaws and operating decisions of the governing body of the
provider where it is based.
    (iv) The main provider has final responsibility for administrative
decisions, final approval for contracts with outside parties, final
approval for personnel actions, final responsibility for personnel
policies (such as fringe benefits/code of conduct), and final approval
for medical staff appointments in the facility or organization.
    (3) Administration and supervision. The reporting relationship
between the facility or organization seeking provider-based status and
the main provider must have the same frequency, intensity, and level of
accountability that exists in the relationship between the main
provider and one of its departments, as evidenced by compliance with
all of the following requirements:
    (i) The facility or organization is under the direct supervision of
the provider where it is located.
    (ii) The facility or organization is operated under the same
monitoring and oversight by the provider as any other department of the
provider, and is operated just as any other department of the provider
with regard to supervision and accountability. The facility or
organization director or individual responsible for daily operations at
the entity--
    (A) Maintains a day-to-day reporting relationship with a manager at
the main provider; and
    (B) Is accountable to the governing body of the main provider, in
the same manner as any department head of the provider.
    (iii) The following administrative functions of the facility or
organization are integrated with those of the provider where the
facility or organization is based: billing services, records, human
resources, payroll, employee benefit package, salary structure, and
purchasing services. Either the same employees or group of employees
handle these administrative functions for the facility or organization
and the main provider, or the administrative functions for both the
facility or organization and the entity are--
    (A) Contracted out under the same contract agreement; or
    (B) Handled under different contract agreements, with the contract
of the facility or organization being managed by the main provider's
billing department.
    (4) Clinical services. The clinical services of the facility or
organization seeking provider-based status and the main provider are
integrated as evidenced by the following:
    (i) Professional staff of the facility or organization have
clinical privileges at the main provider.
    (ii) The main provider maintains the same monitoring and oversight
of the facility or organization as it does for any other department of
the provider.
    (iii) The medical director of the facility or organization seeking
provider-based status maintains a day-to-day reporting relationship
with the Chief Medical Officer or other similar official of the main
provider, and is under the same type of supervision and accountability
as any other director, medical or otherwise, of the main provider.
    (iv) Medical staff committees or other professional committees at
the main provider are responsible for medical activities in the
facility or organization including quality assurance, utilization
review, and the coordination and integration of services, to the extent
practicable, between the facility or organization seeking provider-
based status and the main provider.
    (v) Medical records for patients treated in the facility or
organization are integrated into a unified retrieval system (or cross
reference) of the main provider.
    (vi) Inpatient and outpatient services of the facility or
organization and the main provider are integrated, and patients treated
at the facility or organization who require further care have full
access to all services of the main provider and are referred where
appropriate to the corresponding inpatient or outpatient department or
service of the main provider.
    (5) Financial integration. The financial operations of the facility
or organization are fully integrated within the financial system of the
main provider, as evidenced by shared income and expenses between the
main provider and the facility or organization. The costs of the
facility or organization are reported in a cost center of the provider,
and the financial status of the facility or organization is
incorporated and readily identified in the main provider's trial
balance.
    (6) Public awareness. The facility or organization seeking status
as a department of a provider is held out to the public and other
payers as part of the main provider. When patients enter the provider-
based facility or organization, they are aware that they are entering
the main provider and are billed accordingly.
    (7) Location in immediate vicinity. The facility or organization
and the main provider are located on the same campus, except where the
following requirements are met:
    (i) The facility or organization demonstrates a high level of
integration with the main provider by showing that it meets all of the
other provider-based criteria, and demonstrates that it serves the same
patient population as the main provider, either by submitting records
such as common patient lists and/or demographic data showing that a
high percentage of patients of both the main provider and the applicant
entity come from the same geographic area, or by submitting data
substantiating that the patients served by the entity also receive
services from the main provider (for example, the patients of an RHC
receive inpatient hospital services from the main provider).
    (ii) A facility or organization is not considered to be in the
``immediate vicinity'' of the main provider if the facility or
organization and the main provider are located in different States.
    (e) Provider-based status not applicable to joint ventures. A
facility or organization cannot be considered provider-based if the
entity is owned by two or more providers engaged in a joint venture.
For example, where a hospital has jointly purchased or jointly created
free-standing facilities under joint venture arrangements, neither
party to the joint venture arrangement can claim the free-standing
facility as a provider-based entity.
    (f) Management contracts. Facilities and organizations operated
under management contracts are considered provider-based if all of the
following criteria are met:
    (1) The staff of the facility or organization are employed by the

[[Page 47610]]

provider or by another organization other than the management company.
    (2) The administrative functions of the facility or organization
are integrated with those of the main provider, as determined under
criteria in paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (3) The main provider has significant day-to-day control over the
operations of the facility or organization as determined under criteria
in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (4) The management contract is held by the main provider itself,
not by a parent organization that has control over both the main
provider and the facility or organization.
    (g) Obligations of hospital outpatient departments and hospital-
based entities. (1) Hospital outpatient departments located either on
or off the main premises of the hospital must comply with the anti-
dumping rules in Secs. 489.20(l), (m), (q), and (r) and 489.24 of this
chapter. If any individual comes to any hospital-based entity
(including an RHC) located on the main hospital campus, and a request
is made on the individual's behalf for examination or treatment of a
medical condition, as described in Sec. 489.24, the hospital must
comply with the anti-dumping rules in Sec. 489.24.
    (2) Physician services furnished in hospital outpatient departments
or hospital-based entities (other than RHCs) must be billed with the
correct site-of-service indicator, so that applicable site-of-service
reductions to physician and practitioner payment amounts can be
applied.
    (3) Hospital outpatient departments must comply with all the terms
of the hospital's provider agreement.
    (4) Physicians who work in hospital outpatient departments or
hospital-based entities are obligated to comply with the non-
discrimination provisions in Sec. 489.10(b) of this chapter.
    (5) Hospital outpatient departments (other than RHCs) must hold
themselves out to other payers as outpatient departments of that
hospital, and must treat all patients, for billing purposes, as
hospital outpatients. The department must not treat some patients as
hospital outpatients and others as physician office patients.
    (6) In the case of a patient admitted to the hospital as an
inpatient after receiving treatment in the hospital outpatient
department or hospital-based entity, payments for services in the
hospital outpatient department or hospital-based entity are subject to
the payment window provisions applicable to PPS hospitals and to
hospitals and units excluded from PPS set forth at Sec. 412.2(c)(5) of
this chapter and at Sec. 413.40(c)(2), respectively.
    (7) When a Medicare beneficiary is treated in a hospital outpatient
department or hospital-based entity (other than an RHC), the hospital
has a duty to notify the beneficiary, prior to the delivery of
services, of the beneficiary's potential financial liability (that is,
a coinsurance liability for an outpatient visit to the hospital as well
as for the physician service).
    (8) Hospital outpatient departments must meet applicable hospital
health and safety rules for Medicare-participating hospitals in part
482 of this chapter.
    (9) A facility or organization may not qualify for provider-based
status if all services furnished at the facility are furnished under
arrangement.
    (h) Inappropriate treatment of a facility or organization as
provider-based. If HCFA learns of a provider treating a facility or
organization as provider-based without notifying HCFA to obtain a
determination of provider-based status, HCFA reconsiders all payments
to that provider for all cost reporting periods subject to re-opening
in accordance with Secs. 405.1885 and 405.1889 of this chapter. HCFA
then investigates and determines whether the requirements in paragraph
(d) of this section were met. If the facility or organization did not
qualify for a provider-based determination, HCFA recovers the
difference between the amount of payments that actually were made and
the amount of payments that should have been made in the absence of a
determination of provider-based status, except that recovery will not
be made for any period prior to [insert the effective date of final
rule] if during all of that period the management of the entity made a
good faith effort to operate it as a provider-based facility or
organization, as described in paragraph (i)(2) of this section.
    (i) Inappropriate billing. (1) If HCFA determines that a provider
has been inappropriately billing Medicare for services furnished in a
physician office or other facility or organization as if they had been
furnished in a hospital outpatient department or other department of a
provider or in a provider-based entity, HCFA stops all payments to the
provider for outpatient services until the provider can demonstrate
which payments are proper. If overpayments have been made, HCFA
recovers the difference between the amount of payments that actually
were made and the amount of the payments that should have been made in
the absence of the determination of provider-based status. However,
past payments attributable to treatment as a department of a provider
or a provider-based entity for any period prior to [insert effective
date of final rule] are not recovered if during all of that period the
management of a facility or an organization made a good faith effort to
operate it as a department of a provider or a provider-based entity, as
described in paragraph (i)(2) of this section, prior to [insert
effective date of final rule].
    (2) HCFA determines that the management of a facility has made a
good faith effort to operate it as a provider-based entity if--
    (i) The requirements regarding licensure and public awareness in
paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(6) of this section are met;
    (ii) All facility services were billed as if they had been
furnished by a department of a provider or a provider-based entity of
the main provider; and
    (iii) All professional services of physicians and other
practitioners were billed with the correct site-of-service indicator,
as described in paragraph (g)(7) of this section.
    (j) Correction of errors. HCFA may review a past determination of
provider-based status if it believes that the determination may be
inappropriate, based on the provisions of this section. If HCFA
determines that a previous determination was in error, and the entity
should not be considered provider-based, HCFA notifies the main
provider. Treatment of the facility or organization as provider-based
ceases with the first day of the next cost report period following
notification of the redetermination.

Subpart F--Specific Categories of Costs

    5. In Sec. 413.118, the heading to paragraph (d) is republished,
and a new paragraph (d)(5) is added to read as follows:

Sec. 413.118  Payment for facility services related to covered ASC
surgical procedures performed in hospitals on an outpatient basis.

* * * * *
    (d) Blended payment amount. * * *
    (5) For portions of cost reporting periods beginning on or after
October 1, 1997, for purposes of calculating the blended payment amount
under paragraph (d)(4) of this section, the ASC payment amount is the
sum of the standard overhead amounts reduced by deductibles and
coinsurance as defined in section 1866(a)(2)(ii) of the Act.
* * * * *
    6. In Sec. 413.122, the heading to paragraph (b) is republished, a
new

[[Page 47611]]

paragraph (b)(5) is added, the heading to paragraph (c) is republished,
and a new paragraph (c)(4) is added to read as follows:

413.122  Payment for hospital outpatient radiology services and other
diagnostic procedures.

* * * * *
    (b) Payment for hospital outpatient radiology services. * * *
    (5) For hospital outpatient radiology services furnished on or
after October 1, 1997, the blended payment amount is equal to the sum
of--
    (i) 42 percent of the hospital-specific amount; and
    (ii) 58 percent of the fee schedule amount calculated as 62 percent
of the sum of the fee schedule amounts payable for the same services
when furnished by participating physicians in their offices in the same
locality, less deductible and coinsurance as defined in section
1866(a)(2)(A)(ii) of the Act.
    (c) Payment for other diagnostic procedures. * * *
    (4) For other diagnostic services furnished on or after October 1,
1997, the blended payment amount is equal to the sum of--
    (i) 50 percent of the hospital-specific amount; and
    (ii) 50 percent of the fee schedule amount calculated as 42 percent
of the sum of the fee schedule amounts payable for the same services
when furnished by participating physicians in their offices in the same
locality, less deductible and coinsurance as defined in section
1866(a)(2)(A)(ii) of the Act.
    7. In Sec. 413.124, paragraph (a) is revised to read as follows:

Sec. 413.124  Reduction to hospital outpatient operating costs.

    (a) Except for sole community hospitals, as defined in Sec. 412.92
of this chapter, and critical access hospitals, the reasonable costs of
outpatient hospital services (other than capital-related costs of such
services) are reduced by 5.8 percent for services furnished during
portions of cost reporting periods occurring on or after October 1,
1990 and before January 1, 2000.
* * * * *

Subpart G--Capital-Related Costs

    8. In Sec. 413.130, the heading to paragraph (j) and the
introductory text to paragraph (j)(1) are republished, and paragraph
(j)(1)(ii) is revised to read as follows:

Sec. 413.130  Introduction to capital-related costs.

* * * * *
    (j) Reduction to capital-related costs. (1) Except for sole
community hospitals and critical access hospitals, the amount of
capital-related costs of all hospital outpatient services is reduced
by--
* * * * *
    (ii) 10 percent for portions of cost reporting periods occurring on
or after October 1, 1991 through December 31, 1999 and before January
1, 2000.
* * * * *
    F. A new part 419, consisting of Secs. 419.1, 419.2, 419.20,
419.21, 419.22, 419.30, 419.31, 419.32, 419.40, 419.41, 419.42, 419.43,
419.44, 419.50, 419.51, and 419.60, is added to read as follows:

PART 419--PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR HOSPITAL OUTPATIENT
DEPARTMENT SERVICES

Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
419.1  Scope of part.
419.2  Basis of payment.

Subpart B--Services Subject to and Excluded From the Hospital
Outpatient Prospective Payment System

419.20  Hospitals subject to the hospital outpatient prospective
payment system.
419.21  Hospital outpatient services subject to the outpatient
prospective payment system.
419.22  Hospital outpatient services excluded from payment under the
hospital outpatient prospective payment system.

Subpart C--Basic Methodology for Determining Prospective Payment Rates
for Hospital Outpatient Services

419.30  Base expenditure target for calendar year 1999.
419.31  Ambulatory Payment Classification (APC) system and payment
weights.
419.32  Calculation of prospective payment rates for hospital
outpatient services.

Subpart D--Payments to Hospitals

419.40  Payment concepts.
419.41  Calculation of national beneficiary copayment amounts and
national Medicare program payment amounts.
419.42  Hospital election to reduce copayment.
419.43  Adjustments to national program payment and beneficiary
copayment amounts.
419.44  Payment reductions for surgical procedures.

Subpart E--Updates

419.50  Revisions to groups, weights, and other adjustments.
419.51  Volume control measures for services furnished in CY 2000.

Subpart F--Limitations on Review

419.60  Limitations on administrative and judicial review.

    Authority: Secs. 1102, 1833(t), and 1871 of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1302, 1395l(t), and 1395(hh)).

PART 419--PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR HOSPITAL OUTPATIENT
DEPARTMENT SERVICES

Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec. 419.1  Scope of part.

    (a) Purpose. This part implements section 1833(t) of the Act by
establishing a prospective payment system for services furnished by
hospital outpatient departments to Medicare beneficiaries who are
registered on hospital records as outpatients, effective for services
furnished on or after the implementation date.
    (b) Summary of content. This subpart describes the basis of payment
for outpatient hospital services under the prospective payment system.
Subpart B sets forth the categories of hospitals and services that are
subject to the outpatient hospital prospective payment system and those
categories of hospitals and services that are excluded from the
outpatient hospital prospective payment system. Subpart C sets forth
requirements and the basic methodology by which prospective payment
rates for hospital outpatient services are determined. Subpart D
describes Medicare payment amounts, beneficiary copayment amounts, and
methods of payment to hospitals under the hospital outpatient
prospective payment system. Subpart E describes how the hospital
outpatient prospective payment system may be revised to take into
account changes in medical practice and technology, the addition or
deletion of services, new cost data, and other relevant information and
factors.

Sec. 419.2  Basis of payment.

    (a) Unit of payment. Under the hospital outpatient prospective
payment system, hospitals are paid a predetermined amount for
designated services, which are identified by codes established under
the Health Care Financing Administration Common Procedure Coding System
(HCPCS), furnished to Medicare beneficiaries. The prospective payment
rate for each service or procedure for which payment is allowed under
the hospital outpatient prospective payment system is determined
according to the methodology described in subpart C of this part. The
manner in which the Medicare payment amount and the beneficiary
copayment amount for each service or procedure are determined is
described in subpart D of this part.
    (b) Costs included in determination of hospital outpatient
department payment rates. The prospective payment system establishes a
national payment rate,

[[Page 47612]]

standardized for geographic wage differences, for operating and
capital-related costs that are directly related and integral to
performing a procedure or furnishing a service on an outpatient basis,
including, but not limited to--
    (1) Use of an operating suite, procedure room, or treatment room;
    (2) Use of recovery room;
    (3) Use of an observation bed;
    (4) Anesthesia, drugs, biologicals, other pharmaceuticals, and
blood; medical and surgical supplies and equipment; surgical dressings;
splints, casts, and other devices used for reduction of fractures and
dislocations;
    (5) Supplies and equipment for administering and monitoring
anesthesia or sedation;
    (6) Intra-ocular lenses (IOLs);
    (7) Incidental services such as venipuncture;
    (8) Capital-related costs.
    (c) Costs excluded from determination of hospital outpatient
prospective payment rates. The following costs are excluded from the
hospital outpatient prospective payment rates:
    (1) Medical education costs for approved nursing and allied health
education programs.
    (2) Costs for services listed in Sec. 419.22.

Subpart B--Services Subject to and Excluded From the Hospital
Outpatient Prospective Payment System

Sec. 419.20  Hospitals subject to the hospital outpatient prospective
payment system.

    (a) Applicability. The hospital outpatient prospective payment
system is applicable to any hospital participating in the Medicare
program, except those specified in paragraph (b) of this section, for
services furnished on or after the implementation date.
    (b) Hospitals excluded from the outpatient prospective payment
system. (1) Those services furnished by Maryland hospitals that are
paid under a cost containment waiver in accordance with section
1814(b)(3) of the Act are excluded from the hospital outpatient
prospective payment system.
    (2) Critical access hospitals (CAHs) are excluded from the hospital
outpatient prospective payment system.

Sec. 419.21  Hospital outpatient services subject to the outpatient
prospective payment system.

     Beginning on the implementation date, except for services
described in Sec. 419.22, payment is made under the hospital outpatient
prospective payment system for--
    (a) Medicare Part B services furnished to hospital outpatients
designated by HCFA under this part that are not otherwise excluded
under Sec. 419.22;
    (b) Services that are covered under Medicare Part B when furnished
to hospital inpatients who are either not entitled to benefits under
Part A or who have exhausted their Part A benefits, but are entitled to
benefits under Part B of the program;
    (c) Partial hospitalization services furnished by community mental
health centers (CMHCs);
    (d) The following medical and other health services furnished by a
comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility (CORF) when they fall
outside the definition of CORF services at section 1861(cc)(1) of the
Act; or by a home health agency (HHA) to patients who are not under an
HHA plan or treatment; or, by a hospice program furnishing services to
patients outside the hospice benefit:
    (1) Antigens.
    (2) Splints and casts.
    (3) Pneumococcal vaccine, influenza vaccine, hepatitis B vaccine.

Sec. 419.22  Hospital outpatient services excluded from payment under
the hospital outpatient prospective payment system.

    The following services are not paid for under the hospital
outpatient prospective payment system:
    (a) Physician services.
    (b) Nurse practitioner services.
    (c) Physician assistant services.
    (d) Certified nurse-midwife services.
    (e) Services of qualified psychologists.
    (f) Services of an anesthetist as defined in Sec. 410.69 of this
chapter.
    (g) Clinical social worker services as defined in section
1861(hh)(2) of the Act.
    (h) Rehabilitation services described in section 1833(a)(8) of the
Act.
    (i) Ambulance services.
    (j) Prosthetics and prosthetic supplies, prosthetic devices,
prosthetic implants (except IOLs), and orthotic devices.
    (k) Durable medical equipment supplied by the hospital for the
patient to take home.
    (l) Clinical diagnostic laboratory services.
    (m) Dialysis services furnished to ESRD patients.
    (n) Services and procedures that are not safely furnished in an
outpatient setting or that require inpatient care.
    (o) Services specific to other sites such as nursing homes.
    (p) Services furnished to persons who are inpatients of a SNF and
furnished pursuant to the resident assessment or comprehensive care
plan but that are covered under the SNF prospective payment system,
furnished ``under arrangement,'' and billable only by the SNF.
    (q) Services that are not covered by Medicare by statute.
    (r) Services that are not reasonable or necessary for the diagnosis
or treatment of an illness or disease.

Subpart C--Basic Methodology for Determining Prospective Payment
Rates for Hospital Outpatient Services

Sec. 419.30  Base expenditure target for calendar year 1999.

    (a) HCFA estimates the aggregate amount that would be payable for
hospital outpatient services in calendar year 1999 by summing--
    (1) The total amounts that would be payable from the Trust Fund for
covered hospital outpatient services without regard to the outpatient
prospective payment system described in this part; and
    (2) The total amounts of copayments estimated to be paid by
beneficiaries, under the prospective payment system described in this
part, to hospitals for covered hospital outpatient services.
    (b) The aggregate amount under paragraph (a) of this section is
determined as though the deductible required under section 1833(b) of
the Act did not apply.

Sec. 419.31  Ambulatory Payment Classification (APC) system and payment
weights.

    (a) APC groups. (1) HCFA classifies hospital outpatient services
and procedures that are comparable clinically and similar in terms of
resource use into APC groups.
    (2) The payment rate determined for an APC group in accordance with
Sec. 419.32 and the copayment amount and program payment amount
determined for an APC group in accordance with subpart D of this part
apply to every individual service or procedure within the APC group.
    (b) APC weighting factors. (1) Using hospital claims data from
calendar year 1996 and data from the most recent available hospital
cost reports, HCFA determines the median costs for the services and
procedures within each APC group.
    (2) HCFA assigns to each APC group an appropriate weighting factor
to reflect the relative median costs for the services within the APC
group compared to the median costs for the services in all APC groups.
    (c) Standardizing amounts. (1) HCFA determines the portion of costs
determined in paragraph (b)(1) of this section that is labor-related.
This is known as the ``labor-related portion'' of hospital outpatient
costs.
    (2) HCFA standardizes the median costs determined in paragraph
(b)(1) of

[[Page 47613]]

this section by adjusting for variations in hospital labor costs across
geographic areas.

Sec. 419.32  Calculation of prospective payment rates for hospital
outpatient services.

    (a) Conversion factor for 1999. HCFA calculates a conversion factor
in such a manner as to ensure that payment for hospital outpatient
services furnished in 1999 would have equalled the base expenditure
target calculated in Sec. 419.30, taking APC group weights and
estimated service volume into account.
    (b) Conversion factor for calendar years 2000, 2001, and 2002. (1)
Subject to paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the conversion factor for
each of the calendar years 2000, 2001, and 2002 is equal to the
conversion factor calculated under paragraph (a) of this section for
the previous year adjusted by the hospital inpatient market basket
percentage increase applicable under section 1886(b)(3)(B)(iii) of the
Act for fiscal years 2000, 2001, and 2002, respectively, reduced by one
percentage point.
    (2) Beginning in calendar year 2000, HCFA may substitute for the
hospital inpatient market basket percentage in paragraph (c)(1) of this
section a market basket percentage increase that is determined and
applied to hospital outpatient services in the same manner that the
hospital inpatient market basket percentage increase is determined and
applied to inpatient hospital services.
    (c) Payment rates. The payment rate for services and procedures for
which payment is made under the hospital outpatient prospective payment
system is the product of the conversion factor calculated under
paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this section and the relative weight
determined under Sec. 419.31(b).

Subpart D--Payments to Hospitals

Sec. 419.40  Payment concepts.

    In addition to the payment rate described in Sec. 419.32, for each
APC group there is a predetermined beneficiary copayment amount as
described in Sec. 419.41(a). The Medicare payment for each APC is
calculated by applying the program payment percentage as described in
Sec. 419.41(b).
    (b) For purposes of this section--
    Copayment percentage is calculated as the difference between the
program payment percentage and 100 percent. The copayment percentage in
any year is thus defined for each APC group as the greater of the
following: the ratio of the APC group unadjusted copayment amount to
the annual APC group payment rate, or 20 percent.
    Program payment percentage is calculated as the lower of the
following: the ratio of the APC group payment rate minus the APC group
unadjusted copayment amount, to the APC group payment rate, or 80
percent.
    Unadjusted copayment amount is calculated as 20 percent of the
wage-adjusted national median of charges for services within an APC
group furnished during 1996, updated to 1999 using an actuarial
projection of charge increases for hospital outpatient department
services during the period 1996 to 1999.

Sec. 419.41  Calculation of national beneficiary copayment amounts and
national Medicare program payment amounts.

    (a) Calculation of the national beneficiary copayment amount. To
calculate the unadjusted copayment amount for each APC group, HCFA--
    (1) Standardizes 1996 hospital charges for the services within each
APC group to offset variations in hospital labor costs across
geographic areas;
    (2) Identifies the median of the wage-neutralized 1996 charges for
each APC group; and,
    (3) Determines the value equal to 20 percent of the wage-
neutralized 1996 median charge for each APC group and multiplies that
value by an actuarial projection of increases in charges for hospital
outpatient department services during the period 1996 to 1999. The
result is the unadjusted beneficiary copayment amount for the APC
group.
    (b) Calculation of the program payment amount for each APC group.
(1) HCFA calculates annually the program payment percentage for every
APC group on the basis of each group's unadjusted copayment amount and
its payment rate after the payment rate is adjusted in accordance with
Sec. 419.32.
    (2) The Medicare program payment amounts are calculated annually by
multiplying the updated APC group payment rates by the program payment
percentage.
    (c) To determine payment amounts due for a service paid for under
the hospital outpatient prospective payment system, HCFA makes the
following calculations:
    (1) Makes the wage index adjustment and any other adjustments that
are appropriate in accordance with Sec. 419.43.
    (2) Subtracts the amount of the applicable Part B deductible
provided under Sec. 410.160 of this chapter.
    (3) Multiplies the remainder by the program payment percentage for
the group to determine the program payment amount.
    (4) Subtracts the program payment amount from the amount determined
in paragraph (c)(2) of this section to determine the copayment amount.

Sec. 419.42  Hospital election to reduce copayment.

    (a) A hospital may elect to reduce copayments for any or all APC
groups on a calendar year basis. A hospital may not elect to reduce
copayment for some, but not all, services within the same group.
    (b) A hospital must notify its fiscal intermediary of its election
to reduce copayments no later than 90 days prior to the start of the
calendar year.
    (c) The hospital's election must be properly documented. It must
specifically identify the APCs to which it applies and the copayment
level (within the limits identified below) that the hospital has
selected for each group.
    (d) The election of reduced copayment must remain in effect
unchanged during the year for which the election was made.
    (e) The hospital may advertise and otherwise disseminate
information concerning the reduced level(s) of copayment that it has
elected.
    (f) In electing reduced copayment, a hospital may elect a level
that is less than that year's national copayment amount for the group,
but not less than 20 percent of the APC payment rate as determined in
Sec. 419.32.

Sec. 419.43  Adjustments to national program payment and beneficiary
copayment amounts.

    (a) General rule. HCFA determines national prospective payment
rates for hospital outpatient department services and determines a wage
adjustment factor to adjust the portion of the APC payment and national
beneficiary copayment amount attributable to labor-related costs for
relative differences in labor and labor-related costs across geographic
regions in a budget neutral manner.
    (b) Labor-related portion of payment and copayment rates for
hospital outpatient services. HCFA determines the portion of hospital
outpatient costs attributable to labor and labor-related costs (known
as the ``labor-related portion'' of hospital outpatient costs) in
accordance with Sec. 419.31(c)(1).
    (c) Wage index factor. HCFA uses the hospital inpatient prospective
payment system wage index established in accordance with section
1886(d)(3)(E) of the Act and part 412 of this chapter to make the
adjustment referred to in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (d) Other adjustments. Any other adjustments to payment amounts
made by HCFA to ensure equitable payments are made in a budget neutral
manner.

[[Page 47614]]

Sec. 419.44  Payment reductions for surgical procedures.

    (a) Multiple surgical procedures. When more than one surgical
procedure for which payment is made under the hospital outpatient
prospective payment system is performed during a single surgical
encounter, the Medicare program payment amount and the beneficiary
copayment amount are based on--
    (1) The full amounts for the procedure with the highest APC payment
rate; and
    (2) One half of the full program and beneficiary payment amounts
for all other covered procedures.
    (b) Terminated procedures. When a surgical procedure is terminated
prior to completion due to extenuating circumstances or circumstances
that threaten the well-being of the patient, the Medicare program
payment amount and the beneficiary copayment amount are based on--
    (1) The full amounts if the procedure is discontinued after the
induction of anesthesia or after the procedure is started; and
    (2) One-half of the full program and beneficiary payment amounts if
the procedure is discontinued after the patient is prepared for surgery
and taken to the room where the procedure is to be performed, but
before anesthesia is induced.

Subpart E--Updates

Sec. 419.50  Revisions to groups, weights, and other adjustments.

    (a) HCFA periodically reviews and updates groups, relative payment
weights, and the wage and other adjustments to take into account
changes in medical practice, changes in technology, the addition of new
services, new cost data, and other relevant information and factors.
    (1) Changes in the APC system. HCFA may make a change in the group
composition of the APC system or recalibrate any APC weight, as needed,
but not more frequently than once a year. HCFA makes these changes
based on evidence that a reassignment would improve the consistency of
the group(s) either clinically or with respect to resource consumption.
    (2) New services. HCFA assigns a new service to the APC group that
is most similar clinically and with respect to resource consumption.
    (3) Budget neutrality. HCFA adjusts the conversion factor so that
any adjustments determined under paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(3) of
this section do not increase or decrease the amount of expenditures
that would have been made under this section if the adjustments had not
been made.
    (b) Annual update to conversion factor. HCFA updates the conversion
factor annually as specified in Sec. 419.32.

Sec. 419.51  Volume control measures for services furnished in CY 2000.

    HCFA uses the target amount specified under section 1833(t)(3)(A)
of the Act as an expenditure target for services furnished in CY 1999.
HCFA updates the target amount to CY 2000 based on the adjustment to
the conversion factor in Sec. 419.32(b), estimated changes in the
volume and intensity of hospital outpatient services, and estimated
changes in beneficiary enrollment. HCFA compares the CY 2000 target to
an estimate of CY 2000 actual payments to hospitals. If unnecessary
volume increases cause payments to exceed the target, HCFA determines
the percentage by which the target is exceeded, and adjusts the CY 2002
update to the conversion factor by the same percentage.

Subpart F--Limitations on Review

Sec. 419.60  Limitations on administrative and judicial review.

    There can be no administrative or judicial review under sections
1869 and 1878 of the Act, or otherwise of--
    (a) The development of the APC system, including--
    (1) Establishment of the groups and relative payment weights;
    (2) Wage adjustment factors;
    (3) Other adjustments; and
    (4) Methods for controlling unnecessary increases in volume.
    (b) The calculation of base amounts described in section 1833(t)(3)
of the Act;
    (c) Periodic adjustments described in section 1833(t)(6) of the
Act; and
    (d) The establishment of a separate conversion factor for hospitals
described in section 1886(d)(1)(B)(v) of the Act.

PART 489--PROVIDER AGREEMENTS AND SUPPLIER APPROVAL

    G. Part 489 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation to part 489 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102 and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1302 and 1395hh).

Subpart B--Essentials of Provider Agreements

    2. In Sec. 489.20, the introductory text to the section is
republished; the introductory text to paragraph (d) is revised;
paragraphs (d)(3), (d)(4), and (d)(5) are redesignated as paragraphs
(d)(4), (d)(5), and (d)(6), respectively; and a new paragraph (d)(3) is
added to read as follows:

Sec. 489.20  Basic commitments.

    The provider agrees to the following:
* * * * *
    (d) In the case of a hospital or a CAH that furnishes services to
Medicare beneficiaries, either to furnish directly or to make
arrangements (as defined in Sec. 409.3 of this chapter) for all
Medicare-covered services to inpatients and outpatients of a hospital
or a CAH except the following:
* * * * *
    (3) Nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services, as
defined in section 1861(s)(2)(K)(ii) of the Act.
* * * * *
    3. In Sec. 489.24(b), the definition for ``Comes to the emergency
department'' is revised to read as follows:

Sec. 489.24  Special responsibilities of Medicare hospitals in
emergency cases.

* * * * *
    (b) * * *
    Comes to the emergency department means, with respect to an
individual requesting examination or treatment, that the individual is
on the hospital property. For purposes of this section, ``property''
means the entire main hospital campus, including the parking lot,
sidewalk, and driveway, as well as any facility or organization that is
located off the main hospital campus but has been determined under
Sec. 416.35 of this chapter to be a department of the hospital.
Property also includes ambulances owned and operated by the hospital,
even if the ambulance is not on hospital grounds. An individual in a
nonhospital-owned ambulance on hospital property is considered to have
come to the hospital's emergency department. An individual in a
nonhospital-owned ambulance off hospital property is not considered to
have come to the hospital's emergency department, even if a member of
the ambulance staff contacts the hospital by telephone or telemetry
communications and informs the hospital that they want to transport the
individual to the hospital for examination and treatment. In such
situations, the hospital may deny access if it is in ``diversionary
status,'' that is, it does not have the staff or facilities to accept
any additional emergency patients. If, however, the ambulance staff
disregards the hospital's instructions and transports the individual on
to hospital property, the individual is considered to have come to the
emergency department.
* * * * *

[[Page 47615]]

PART 498--APPEALS PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINATIONS THAT AFFECT
PARTICIPATION IN THE MEDICARE PROGRAM AND FOR DETERMINATIONS THAT
AFFECT THE PARTICIPATION OF ICFs/MR AND CERTAIN NFs IN THE MEDICAID
PROGRAM

    H. Part 498 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 498 continues to read as
follows:

    Authority: Secs. 1102 and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1302 and 1395(hh).

    2. In Sec. 498.2, the introductory text is republished, and the
definition of ``Provider'' is revised to read as follows:

Sec. 498.2  Definitions.

As used in this part --

* * * * *
    Provider means a hospital, critical access hospital (CAH), skilled
nursing facility (SNF), comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation
facility (CORF), home health agency (HHA), or hospice, that has in
effect an agreement to participate in Medicare, that has in effect an
agreement to participate in Medicaid, or a clinic, rehabilitation
agency, or public health agency that has a similar agreement but only
to furnish outpatient physical therapy or outpatient speech pathology
services, and prospective provider means any of the listed entities
that seeks to participate in Medicare as a provider or to have any
facility or organization determined to be a department of the provider
or provider-based entity under Sec. 412.65 of this chapter.
* * * * *
    3. In Sec. 498.3, the introductory text to paragraph (b) is
republished; paragraphs (b)(2) through (b)(14) are redesignated as
paragraphs (b)(3) through (b)(15), respectively; and a new paragraph
(b)(2) is added to read as follows:

Sec. 498.3  Scope and applicability.

* * * * *
    (b) Initial determinations by HCFA. HCFA makes initial
determinations with respect to the following matters:
* * * * *
    (2) Whether a prospective department of a provider or provider-
based entity qualifies as a department of a provider or provider-based
entity under Sec. 413.65 of this chapter.
* * * * *

PART 1003--CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES, ASSESSMENTS AND EXCLUSIONS

    I. Part 1003 is amended as set forth below:
    1. The authority citation for part 1003 is revised to read as
follows:

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1302, 1320-7, 1320a-7a, 1320b-10, 1395u(j),
1395u(k), 1395cc(g), 1395dd(d)(1), 1395mm, 1395nn(g), 1395ss(d),
1396b(m), 11131(c) and 11137(b)(2).

    2. Section 1003.100 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as
follows:

Sec. 1003.100  Basis and purpose.

    (a) Basis. This part implements sections 1102, 1128(c), 1128A,
1140, 1842(j), 1842(k), 1866(g), 1876(i)(6), 1877(g), 1882(d) and
1903(m)(5) of the Social Security Act, and sections 421(c) and
427(b)(2) of Pub. L. 99-660 (42 U.S.C. 1302, 1320a-7, 1320a-7a, 1320b-
10, 1395u(j), 1395u(k), 1395cc(g), 1395mm(i)(6), 1395nn(g), 1395ss(d),
1396d(m)(5), 11131(c) and 11137(b)(2)).
* * * * *
    3. Section 1003.102 is amended by republishing the introductory
text to paragraph (b), by reserving paragraphs (b)(11) through (b)(13),
and by adding a new paragraph (b)(14) to read as follows:

Sec. 1003.102  Basis for civil money penalties and assessments.

* * * * *
    (b) The OIG may impose a penalty, and where authorized, an
assessment against any person (including an insurance company in the
case of paragraphs (b)(5) and (b)(6) of this section) whom it
determines in accordance with this part--
* * * * *
    (11) [Reserved]
    (12) [Reserved]
    (13) [Reserved]
    (14) Has knowingly and willfully presented, or caused to be
presented, a bill or request for payment for an item or service
furnished to a hospital patient for which payment may be made under the
Medicare or another Federal health care program, if that bill or
request is inconsistent with an arrangement under section 1866(a)(1)(H)
of the Act, or violates the requirements for such an arrangement.
* * * * *
    4. Section 1003.103 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as
follows:

Sec. 1003.103  Amount of penalty.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this
section, the OIG may impose a penalty of not more than $10,000 for each
item or service that is subject to a determination under Sec. 1003.102.
* * * * *
    5. Section 1003.105 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(1)(i) to
read as follows:

Sec. 1003.105  Exclusion from participation in Medicare and State
health care programs.

    (a)(1) * * *
    (i) Any person who is subject to a penalty or assessment under
Sec. 1003.102(a), (b)(1) through (b)(4), or (b)(14).
* * * * *
(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 93.774, Medicare--
Supplementary Medical Insurance Program)

    Dated: June 29, 1998.
Nancy-Ann Min DeParle,
Administrator, Health Care Financing Administration.

    Dated: June 29, 1998.
June G. Brown,
Inspector General, Department of Health and Human Services.

    Approved: August 15, 1998.
Donna E. Shalala,
Secretary.

    Note: The following addenda will not appear in the Code of
Federal Regulations.




  <hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond>
<hbond><hbond>



[[Page 47615]]

  Addendum A.--List of Proposed Hospital Outpatient Ambulatory Payment Classes With Status Indicators, Relative
                                 Weights, Payment Rates, and Coinsurance Amounts
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                          National     Minimum
 APC \1\       Group title                             Status      Relative   Payment    unadjusted   unadjusted
   \2\                                               indicator      weight      rate    coinsurance  coinsurance
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
020......  Partial             ..................  S                   4.11    $208.01       $46.78       $41.60
            Hospitalization
            per diem.
031......  Dental procedures.  ..................  S                   1.34     $67.90       $13.58       $13.58
061......  Level I             ..................  X                   1.04     $52.70       $36.61       $10.54
            Chemotherapeutic
            agents.
062......  Level II            ..................  X                   1.69     $85.63       $36.61       $17.13
            Chemotherapeutic
            agents.

[[Page 47616]]


063......  Level III           ..................  X                   2.89    $146.43      $110.97       $29.29
            Chemotherapeutic
            agents.
064......  Level IV            ..................  X                   4.17    $211.29      $140.12       $42.26
            Chemotherapeutic
            agents.
089......  Neuropsychological  ..................  X                   2.54    $128.70       $37.29       $25.74
            Testing.
090......  Monitoring          ..................  X                   0.85     $43.07       $12.43        $8.61
            psychiatric drugs.
091......  Brief Individual    ..................  S                   1.09     $55.23       $14.01       $11.05
            Psychotherapy.
092......  Extended            ..................  S                   1.57     $79.55       $21.92       $15.91
            Individual
            Psychotherapy.
093......  Family              ..................  S                   1.54     $78.03       $20.11       $15.61
            Psychotherapy.
094......  Group               ..................  S                   1.24     $62.83       $20.11       $12.57
            Psychotherapy.
121......  Level I needle      ..................  T                   0.67     $33.95       $20.91        $6.79
            biopsy/aspiration.
122......  Level II needle     ..................  T                   4.87    $246.76      $115.03       $49.35
            biopsy/aspiration.
131......  Level I incision &  ..................  T                   1.94     $98.30       $36.61       $19.66
            drainage.
132......  Level II incision   ..................  T                   6.04    $306.04      $134.13       $61.21
            & drainage.
137......  Nail procedures...  ..................  T                   0.46     $23.31        $4.66        $4.66
141......  Level I             ..................  T                   0.59     $29.90        $9.49        $5.98
            Destruction of
            lesion.
142......  Level II            ..................  T                   3.77    $191.02       $73.00       $38.20
            Destruction of
            lesion.
151......  Level I             ..................  T                   1.74     $88.16       $35.71       $17.63
            debridement/
            destruction.
152......  Level II            ..................  T                  10.43    $528.48      $261.71      $105.70
            debridement/
            destruction.
161......  Level I excision/   ..................  T                   3.50    $177.34       $75.48       $35.47
            biopsy.
162......  Level II excision/  ..................  T                   5.67    $287.30      $125.43       $57.46
            biopsy.
163......  Level III excision/ ..................  T                  10.69    $541.66      $264.65      $108.33
            biopsy.
181......  Level I skin        ..................  T                   2.19    $110.97       $43.84       $22.19
            repair.
182......  Level II skin       ..................  T                   4.00    $202.68       $84.98       $40.54
            repair.
183......  Level III skin      ..................  T                  11.17    $565.98      $286.46      $113.20
            repair.
184......  Level IV skin       ..................  T                  15.17    $768.66      $396.40      $153.73
            repair.
197......  Incision/excision   ..................  T                  12.13    $614.62      $310.75      $122.92
            breast.
198......  Breast              ..................  T                  19.17    $971.33      $530.20      $194.27
            reconstruction/
            mastectomy.
200......  Arthrocentesis &    ..................  T                   1.89     $95.77       $39.10       $19.15
            Ligament/Tendon
            Injection.
207......  Closed treatment    ..................  T                   1.70     $86.14       $31.64       $17.23
            fracture finger/
            toe/trunk.
209......  Closed treatment    ..................  T                   1.94     $98.30       $37.29       $19.66
            fracture/
            dislocation/
            except finger/toe/
            trunk.
210......  Bone/joint          ..................  T                  10.46    $530.00      $283.40      $106.00
            manipulation
            under anesthesia.
216......  Open/percutaneous   ..................  T                  20.13  $1,019.98      $520.82      $204.00
            treatment
            fracture or
            dislocation.
217......  Arthroplasty......  ..................  T                  20.48  $1,037.71      $526.81      $207.54
218......  Arthroplasty with   ..................  T                  27.49  $1,392.90      $715.52      $278.58
            prosthesis.
*226.....  Maxillofacial       ..................  T                   1.59     $80.56       $21.92       $16.11
            prostheses.
231......  Level I skull and   ..................  T                  12.02    $609.05      $299.90      $121.81
            facial bone
            procedures.
232......  Level II skull and  ..................  T                  23.93  $1,212.52      $639.35      $242.50
            facial bone
            procedures.
251......  Level I             ..................  T                  14.26    $722.55      $366.12      $144.51
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
252......  Level II            ..................  T                  19.39    $982.48      $509.18      $196.50
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
253......  Level III           ..................  T                  26.33  $1,334.13      $699.24      $266.83
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
254......  Level IV            ..................  T                  34.37  $1,741.51      $937.11      $348.30
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
261......  Level I Hand        ..................  T                  10.54    $534.06      $261.48      $106.81
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
262......  Level II Hand       ..................  T                  18.35    $929.78      $480.82      $185.96
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
271......  Level I Foot        ..................  T                  14.41    $730.15      $368.38      $146.03
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
272......  Level II Foot       ..................  T                  16.56    $839.09      $409.74      $167.82
            Musculoskeletal
            Procedures.
276......  Bunion Procedures.  ..................  T                  19.19    $972.35      $500.14      $194.47
280......  Diagnostic          ..................  T                  22.20  $1,124.86      $581.72      $224.97
            Arthroscopy.
281......  Level I Surgical    ..................  T                  22.65  $1,147.66      $590.20      $229.53
            Arthroscopy.
282......  Level II Surgical   ..................  T                  23.94  $1,213.03      $614.04      $242.61
            Arthroscopy.
286......  Arthroscopically-   ..................  T                  26.76  $1,355.91      $802.41      $271.18
            Aided Procedures.
311......  Level I ENT         ..................  T                   1.43     $72.46       $20.57       $14.49
            Procedures.
312......  Level II ENT        ..................  T                   7.26    $367.86      $178.31       $73.57
            Procedures.
313......  Level III ENT       ..................  T                  15.81    $801.08      $411.09      $160.22
            Procedures.
314......  Level IV ENT        ..................  T                  25.65  $1,299.67      $693.37      $259.93
            Procedures.
*317.....  Implantation of     ..................  T              .........  .........  ...........  ...........
            Cochlear Device.
318......  Nasal               ..................  T                   2.07    $104.89       $38.65       $20.98
            Cauterization/
            Packing.
319......  Tonsil/Adenoid      ..................  T                  17.30    $876.58      $480.02      $175.32
            Procedures.
320......  Thoracentesis/      ..................  T                   3.17    $160.62       $79.33       $32.12
            Lavage Procedures.
331......  Level I Endoscopy   ..................  T                   0.69     $34.96       $14.01        $6.99
            Upper Airway.
332......  Level II Endoscopy  ..................  T                   9.74    $493.52      $244.98       $98.70
            Upper Airway.
333......  Level III           ..................  T                  17.24    $873.54      $464.20      $174.71
            Endoscopy Upper
            Airway.
336......  Endoscopy Lower     ..................  T                   7.44    $376.98      $197.98       $75.40
            Airway.
339......  Injection of        ..................  T                   1.02     $51.68       $19.66       $10.34
            Sclerosing
            Solution.
341......  Level I Needle and  ..................  T                   0.13      $6.59        $2.94        $1.32
            Catheter
            Placement.
342......  Level II Needle     ..................  T                   3.20    $162.14       $80.23       $32.43
            and Catheter
            Placement.
343......  Level III Needle    ..................  T                   9.52    $482.37      $224.87       $96.47
            and Catheter
            Placement.
346......  Placement           ..................  T                   4.83    $244.73      $120.23       $48.95
            Transvenous Caths/
            Cutdown.
347......  Injection           ..................  T                   2.93    $148.46       $62.15       $29.69
            Procedures for
            Interventional
            Radiology.
360......  Removal/Revision,   ..................  T                   6.09    $308.58      $140.12       $61.72
            Pacemaker/
            Vascular Device.
367......  Vascular Ligation.  ..................  T                  17.59    $891.28      $449.06      $178.26
368......   Vascular Repair/   ..................  T                  22.83  $1,156.78      $648.85      $231.36
            Fistula
            Construction.
369......  Blood and Blood     ..................  T                   4.33    $219.40       $97.18       $43.88
            Product Exchange.

[[Page 47617]]


396......  Lymph Node          ..................  T                  13.28    $672.89      $338.77      $134.58
            Excisions.
397......  Thyroid/            ..................  T                  18.36    $930.29      $496.86      $186.06
            Lymphadenectomy
            Procedures.
406......  Esophageal          ..................  T                   4.31    $218.39      $108.48       $43.68
            Dilation without
            Endoscopy.
407......  Esophagoscopy.....  ..................  T                   7.06    $357.73      $189.84       $71.55
417......  Diagnostic Upper    ..................  T                   6.44    $326.31      $181.70       $65.26
            GI Endoscopy.
418......  Therapeutic Upper   ..................  T                   7.59    $384.58      $214.25       $76.92
            GI Endoscopy.
419......  Small Intestine     ..................  T                   7.13    $361.27      $164.08       $72.25
            Endoscopy.
426......  Diagnostic Lower    ..................  T                   6.85    $347.09      $187.81       $69.42
            GI Endoscopy.
427......  Therapeutic Lower   ..................  T                   8.22    $416.50      $224.19       $83.30
            GI Endoscopy.
437......  Therapeutic         ..................  T                   2.91    $147.45       $76.61       $29.49
            Anoscopy.
446......  Diagnostic          ..................  T                   2.59    $131.23       $65.09       $26.25
            Sigmoidoscopy.
447......  Therapeutic         ..................  T                   6.87    $348.10      $184.76       $69.62
            Proctosigmoidosco
            py.
448......  Therapeutic         ..................  T                   5.37    $272.09      $141.25       $54.42
            Flexible
            Sigmoidoscopy.
449......  Complex GI          ..................  T                   7.80    $395.22      $215.38       $79.04
            Endoscopy.
451......  Level I Anal/       ..................  T                   2.56    $129.71       $54.24       $25.94
            Rectal Procedures.
452......  Level II Anal/      ..................  T                   4.82    $244.23      $109.61       $48.85
            Rectal Procedures.
453......  Level III Anal/     ..................  T                  16.87    $854.79      $445.22      $170.96
            Rectal Procedures.
456......  Endoscopic          ..................  T                   9.78    $495.55      $257.19       $99.11
            Retrograde
            Cholangio-
            Pancreatography
            (ERCP).
458......  Percutaneous        ..................  T                   7.23    $366.34      $181.59       $73.27
            Biliary
            Endoscopic
            Procedures.
459......  Peritoneal and      ..................  T                  18.06    $915.09      $496.52      $183.02
            Abdominal
            Procedures.
466......  Hernia/Hydrocele    ..................  T                  21.43  $1,085.85      $562.97      $217.17
            Procedures.
470......  Tube Procedures...  ..................  T                   2.22    $112.49       $54.92       $22.50
521......  Level I             ..................  T                   5.06    $256.39      $112.10       $51.28
            Cystourethroscopy
            and other
            Genitourinary
            Procedures.
522......  Level II            ..................  T                  10.46    $530.00      $262.39      $106.00
            Cystourethroscopy
            and other
            Genitourinary
            Procedures.
523......  Level III           ..................  T                  16.87    $854.79      $447.03      $170.96
            Cystourethroscopy
            and other
            Genitourinary
            Procedures.
524......  Level IV            ..................  T                  28.89  $1,463.84      $833.38      $292.77
            Cystourethroscopy
            and other
            Genitourinary
            Procedures.
527......  Lithotripsy.......  ..................  T                  51.56  $2,612.52    $1,372.95      $522.50
529......  Simple Urinary      ..................  T                   2.50    $126.67       $63.05       $25.33
            Studies and
            Procedures.
530......  Genitourinary       ..................  T                   2.52    $127.69       $54.69       $25.54
            Procedures.
531......  Level I Urethral    ..................  T                  18.94    $959.68      $527.26      $191.94
            Procedures.
532......  Level II Urethral   ..................  T                  25.50  $1,292.07      $602.18      $258.41
            Procedures.
536......  Circumcision......  ..................  T                  13.17    $667.32      $326.57      $133.46
537......  Penile Procedures.  ..................  T                  28.72  $1,455.23      $864.34      $291.05
538......  Insertion of        ..................  T                  45.59  $2,310.02    $1,540.64      $462.00
            Penile Prosthesis.
546......  Testes/Epididymis   ..................  T                  17.14    $868.47      $453.81      $173.69
            Procedures.
547......  Prostate Biopsy...  ..................  T                   4.39    $222.44      $125.20       $44.49
550......  Surgical            ..................  T                  16.89    $855.81      $447.93      $171.16
            Hysteroscopy.
551......  Level I             ..................  T                  24.78  $1,255.59      $711.67      $251.12
            Laparoscopy.
552......  Level II            ..................  T                  37.71  $1,910.75    $1,053.16      $382.15
            Laparoscopy.
561......  Level I Female      ..................  T                   1.52     $77.02       $24.63       $15.40
            Reproductive
            Procedures.
562......  Level II Female     ..................  T                  12.76    $646.54      $330.75      $129.31
            Reproductive
            Procedures.
563......  Level III Female    ..................  T                  16.90    $856.31      $464.88      $171.26
            Reproductive
            Procedures.
567......  D & C.............  ..................  T                  13.61    $689.61      $364.09      $137.92
568......  Infertility         ..................  T                   2.49    $126.17       $49.49       $25.23
            Procedures.
578......  Pregnancy and       ..................  T                   1.26     $63.84       $33.90       $12.77
            Neonatal Care
            Procedures.
580......  Vaginal Delivery..  ..................  T                   4.59    $232.57      $146.34       $46.51
586......  Therapeutic         ..................  T                  12.50    $633.37      $431.89      $126.67
            Abortion.
587......  Spontaneous         ..................  T                  13.25    $671.37      $347.02      $134.27
            Abortion.
600......  Spinal Tap........  ..................  T                   2.63    $133.26       $61.47       $26.65
601......  Level I Nervous     ..................  T                   3.11    $157.58       $74.13       $31.52
            System Injections.
602......  Level II Nervous    ..................  T                   3.33    $168.73       $87.69       $33.75
            System Injections.
616......  Implantation of     ..................  T                  14.43    $731.16      $366.57      $146.23
            Neurostimulator
            Electrodes.
617......  Revision/Removal    ..................  T                  11.56    $585.74      $287.59      $117.15
            Neurological
            Device.
618......  Implantation of     ..................  T                  25.56  $1,295.11      $780.49      $259.02
            Neurological
            Device.
631......  Level I Nerve       ..................  T                  12.98    $657.69      $333.80      $131.54
            Procedures.
632......  Level II Nerve      ..................  T                  18.13    $918.64      $461.04      $183.73
            Procedures.
648......  Laser Retinal       ..................  T                   3.94    $199.64       $95.15       $39.93
            Procedures.
649......  Laser Eye           ..................  T                   4.44    $224.97      $111.64       $44.99
            Procedures except
            Retinal.
651......  Level I Anterior    ..................  T                   7.24    $366.85      $174.70       $73.37
            Segment Eye
            Procedures.
652......  Level II Anterior   ..................  T                  16.48    $835.03      $433.69      $167.01
            Segment Eye
            Procedures.
667......  Cataract            ..................  T                  15.33    $776.40      $521.72      $155.28
            Procedures.
668......  Cataract            ..................  T                  19.28    $976.91      $530.87      $195.38
            Procedures with
            IOL Insert.
670......  Corneal Transplant  ..................  T                  29.23  $1,481.07      $847.50      $296.21
676......  Posterior Segment   ..................  T                   6.30    $319.22      $140.35       $63.84
            Eye Procedures.
677......  Strabismus/Muscle   ..................  T                  16.26    $823.89      $436.63      $164.78
            Procedures.
681......  Level I Eye         ..................  T                   1.67     $84.62       $30.51       $16.92
            Procedures.
682......  Level II Eye        ..................  T                   3.54    $179.37       $81.36       $35.87
            Procedures.
683......  Level III Eye       ..................  T                  10.19    $516.32      $257.87      $103.26
            Procedures.
684......  Level IV Eye        ..................  T                  13.48    $683.02      $348.94      $136.60
            Procedures.

[[Page 47618]]


690......  Vitrectomy........  ..................  T                  30.54  $1,547.45      $852.02      $309.49
700......  Plain Film........  ..................  X                   0.78     $39.52       $22.37        $7.90
706......  Miscellaneous       ..................  X                   1.96     $99.31       $57.63       $19.86
            Radiological
            Procedures.
710......  Computerized Axial  ..................  S                   5.06    $256.39      $176.28       $51.28
            Tomography.
716......  Fluoroscopy.......  ..................  X                   1.59     $80.56       $47.91       $16.11
720......  Magnetic Resonance  ..................  S                   6.34    $321.24      $206.11       $64.25
            Angiography.
726......  Magnetic Resonance  ..................  S                   7.96    $403.33      $258.09       $80.67
            Imaging.
728......  Myelography.......  ..................  S                   4.07    $206.22      $113.23       $41.24
730......  Arthography.......  ..................  S                   2.48    $125.66       $72.09       $25.13
736......  Digestive           ..................  S                   1.85     $93.74       $54.24       $18.75
            Radiology.
737......  Diagnostic          ..................  S                   2.81    $142.38       $86.56       $28.48
            Urography.
738......  Therapeutic         ..................  S                   4.48    $227.00      $133.23       $45.40
            Radiologic
            Procedures.
739......  Diagnostic          ..................  S                   5.83    $295.40      $168.71       $59.08
            Angiography and
            Venography.
746......  Mammography.......  ..................  S                   0.69     $34.96       $19.44        $6.99
747......  Diagnostic          ..................  S                   1.65     $83.60       $54.69       $16.72
            Ultrasound Except
            Vascular.
749......  Guidance under      ..................  X                   2.44    $123.63       $76.16       $24.73
            Ultrasound.
750......  Therapeutic         ..................  X                   0.91     $46.11       $25.54        $9.22
            Radiation
            Treatment
            Planning.
751......  Level I             ..................  X                   1.15     $58.27       $33.22       $11.65
            Therapeutic
            Radiation
            Treatment
            Preparation.
752......  Level II            ..................  X                   3.54    $179.37       $88.82       $35.87
            Therapeutic
            Radiation
            Treatment
            Preparation.
757......  Radiation Therapy.  ..................  S                   2.30    $116.54       $52.43       $23.31
758......  Hyperthermic        ..................  S                   3.41    $172.78       $76.84       $34.56
            Therapies.
759......  Brachytherapy and   ..................  S                   7.98    $404.34      $160.01       $80.87
            Complex
            Radioelement
            Applications.
760......  PET Scans.........  ..................  S                  17.26    $874.55      $419.46      $174.91
*761.....  Standard Non-       ..................  S                   2.04    $103.37       $61.47       $20.67
            Imaging Nuclear
            Medicine.
*762.....  Complex Non-        ..................  S                   1.78     $90.19       $51.53       $18.04
            Imaging Nuclear
            Medicine.
771......  Standard Planar     ..................  S                   3.78    $191.53      $116.84       $38.31
            Nuclear Medicine.
772......  Complex Planar      ..................  S                   4.22    $213.83      $127.92       $42.77
            Nuclear Medicine.
781......  Standard SPECT      ..................  S                   5.26    $266.52      $145.77       $53.30
            Nuclear Medicine.
782......  Complex SPECT       ..................  S                   9.28    $470.21      $275.04       $94.04
            Nuclear Medicine.
*791.....  Standard            ..................  S                  15.83    $802.10      $562.06      $160.42
            Therapeutic
            Nuclear Medicine.
*792.....  Complex             ..................  S                   4.80    $243.21      $144.19       $48.64
            Therapeutic
            Nuclear Medicine.
861......  Immunology Tests..  ..................  X                   0.13      $6.59        $3.62        $1.32
881......  Level I Pathology.  ..................  X                   0.20     $10.13        $6.78        $2.03
882......  Level II Pathology  ..................  X                   0.39     $19.76       $11.75        $3.95
883......  Level III           ..................  X                   0.65     $32.94       $20.34        $6.59
            Pathology.
900......  Critical Care.....  ..................  V                   7.44    $376.98      $144.87       $75.40
901......  Level I             ..................  X                   0.07      $3.55        $2.49        $0.71
            Immunization.
*902.....  Level II            ..................  X                   1.78     $90.19       $41.47       $18.04
            Immunization.
*903.....  Level III           ..................  X                   1.16     $58.78       $25.65       $11.76
            Immunization.
906......  Infusion Therapy    ..................  X                   1.46     $73.98       $42.49       $14.80
            except
            Chemotherapy.
907......  Intramuscular       ..................  X                   0.85     $43.07       $11.98        $8.61
            Injections.
+91111...  Low Level Clinic    Well care and       V                   1.06     $53.71       $12.66       $10.74
            Visits.             administrative.
91118....  Low Level Clinic    Skin and breast     V                   0.83     $42.06        $9.27        $8.41
            Visits.             diseases.
91124....  Low Level Clinic    Musculoskeletal     V                   0.87     $44.08        $9.49        $8.82
            Visits.             diseases.
91131....  Low Level Clinic    Ear, nose, mouth    V                   0.81     $41.04        $9.04        $8.21
            Visits.             and throat
                                diseases.
91133....  Low Level Clinic    Respiratory system  V                   0.80     $40.54        $8.59        $8.11
            Visits.             diseases.
91136....  Low Level Clinic    Cardiovascular      V                   0.85     $43.07        $8.61        $8.61
            Visits.             system diseases.
91141....  Low Level Clinic    Digestive system    V                   0.98     $49.66       $10.40        $9.93
            Visits.             diseases.
91153....  Low Level Clinic    Kidney, urinary     V                   0.91     $46.11        $9.27        $9.22
            Visits.             tract and male
                                genital diseases.
91156....  Low Level Clinic    Female genital      V                   0.93     $47.12        $9.42        $9.42
            Visits.             system diseases.
*91157...  Low Level Clinic    Pregnancy and       V                   1.33     $67.39       $14.46       $13.48
            Visits.             neonatal care.
91163....  Low Level Clinic    Nervous system      V                   0.98     $49.66       $10.17        $9.93
            Visits.             diseases.
*91168...  Low Level Clinic    Eye diseases......  V                   0.98     $49.66       $10.62        $9.93
            Visits.
*91172...  Low Level Clinic    Trauma and          V                   1.06     $53.71       $14.24       $10.74
            Visits.             poisoning.
*91178...  Low Level Clinic    Major signs,        V                   1.52     $77.02       $21.58       $15.40
            Visits.             symptoms and
                                findings.
91182....  Low Level Clinic    Endocrine,          V                   0.87     $44.08        $9.04        $8.82
            Visits.             nutritional and
                                metabolic
                                diseases.
*91186...  Low Level Clinic    Immunologic and     V                   1.09     $55.23       $11.30       $11.05
            Visits.             hematologic
                                diseases.
91188....  Low Level Clinic    Malignancy........  V                   0.72     $36.48        $8.14        $7.30
            Visits.
+91191...  Low Level Clinic    Psychiatric         V                   1.09     $55.23       $14.01       $11.05
            Visits.             disorders.
91197....  Low Level Clinic    Infectious disease  V                   1.02     $51.68       $11.53       $10.34
            Visits.
+91199...  Low Level Clinic    Unknown cause of    V                   1.31     $66.38       $20.79       $13.28
            Visits.             mortality.
+91311...  Mid Level Clinic    Well care and       V                   1.06     $53.71       $12.66       $10.74
            Visits.             administrative.
91318....  Mid Level Clinic    Skin and breast     V                   0.98     $49.66        $9.93        $9.93
            Visits.             diseases.
91324....  Mid Level Clinic    Musculoskeletal     V                   0.98     $49.66        $9.93        $9.93
            Visits.             diseases.
91331....  Mid Level Clinic    Ear, nose, mouth    V                   0.94     $47.63        $9.53        $9.53
            Visits.             and throat
                                diseases.
91333....  Mid Level Clinic    Respiratory system  V                   0.93     $47.12        $9.42        $9.42
            Visits.             diseases.
91336....  Mid Level Clinic    Cardiovascular      V                   1.00     $50.67       $10.13       $10.13
            Visits.             system diseases.
91341....  Mid Level Clinic    Digestive system    V                   1.00     $50.67       $10.13       $10.13
            Visits.             diseases.
91353....  Mid Level Clinic    Kidney, urinary     V                   1.04     $52.70       $10.54       $10.54
            Visits.             tract and male
                                genital diseases.

[[Page 47619]]


91356....  Mid Level Clinic    Female genital      V                   1.06     $53.71       $10.74       $10.74
            Visits.             system diseases.
*91357...  Mid Level Clinic    Pregnancy and       V                   1.22     $61.82       $12.66       $12.36
            Visits.             neonatal care.
91363....  Mid Level Clinic    Nervous system      V                   1.04     $52.70       $10.54       $10.54
            Visits.             diseases.
*91368...  Mid Level Clinic    Eye diseases......  V                   0.87     $44.08        $8.82        $8.82
            Visits.
*91372...  Mid Level Clinic    Trauma and          V                   1.06     $53.71       $10.85       $10.74
            Visits.             poisoning.
*91378...  Mid Level Clinic    Major signs,        V                   1.13     $57.26       $11.45       $11.45
            Visits.             symptoms and
                                findings.
91382....  Mid Level Clinic    Endocrine,          V                   1.00     $50.67       $10.13       $10.13
            Visits.             nutritional and
                                metabolic
                                diseases.
*91386...  Mid Level Clinic    Immunologic and     V                   1.04     $52.70       $10.54       $10.54
            Visits.             hematologic
                                diseases.
91388....  Mid Level Clinic    Malignancy........  V                   0.83     $42.06        $8.41        $8.41
            Visits.
+91391...  Mid Level Clinic    Psychiatric         V                   1.09     $55.23       $14.01       $11.05
            Visits.             disorders.
91397....  Mid Level Clinic    Infectious disease  V                   1.06     $53.71       $10.74       $10.74
            Visits.
+91399...  Mid Level Clinic    Unknown cause of    V                   1.31     $66.38       $20.79       $13.28
            Visits.             mortality.
+91511...  High Level Clinic   Well care and       V                   1.06     $53.71       $12.66       $10.74
            Visits.             administrative.
91518....  High Level Clinic   Skin and breast     V                   1.69     $85.63       $19.21       $17.13
            Visits.             diseases.
91524....  High Level Clinic   Musculoskeletal     V                   1.37     $69.42       $15.37       $13.88
            Visits.             diseases.
91531....  High Level Clinic   Ear, nose, mouth    V                   1.31     $66.38       $14.92       $13.28
            Visits.             and throat
                                diseases.
91533....  High Level Clinic   Respiratory system  V                   1.33     $67.39       $13.79       $13.48
            Visits.             diseases.
91536....  High Level Clinic   Cardiovascular      V                   1.43     $72.46       $15.37       $14.49
            Visits.             system diseases.
91541....  High Level Clinic   Digestive system    V                   1.50     $76.00       $16.05       $15.20
            Visits.             diseases.
91553....  High Level Clinic   Kidney, urinary     V                   1.30     $65.87       $14.01       $13.17
            Visits.             tract and male
                                genital diseases.
91556....  High Level Clinic   Female genital      V                   1.43     $72.46       $14.49       $14.49
            Visits.             system diseases.
91557....  High Level Clinic   Pregnancy and       V                   1.81     $91.71       $22.15       $18.34
            Visits.             neonatal care.
91563....  High Level Clinic   Nervous system      V                   1.50     $76.00       $16.72       $15.20
            Visits.             diseases.
91568....  High Level Clinic   Eye diseases......  V                   1.31     $66.38       $13.79       $13.28
            Visits.
91572....  High Level Clinic   Trauma and          V                   1.69     $85.63       $22.15       $17.13
            Visits.             poisoning.
91578....  High Level Clinic   Major signs,        V                   1.89     $95.77       $29.15       $19.15
            Visits.             symptoms and
                                findings.
91582....  High Level Clinic   Endocrine,          V                   1.41     $71.44       $15.14       $14.29
            Visits.             nutritional and
                                metabolic
                                diseases.
91586....  High Level Clinic   Immunologic and     V                   1.65     $83.60       $18.98       $16.72
            Visits.             hematologic
                                diseases.
91588....  High Level Clinic   Malignancy........  V                   1.09     $55.23       $12.43       $11.05
            Visits.
91591....  High Level Clinic   Psychiatric         V                   1.57     $79.55       $21.92       $15.91
            Visits.             disorders.
91597....  High Level Clinic   Infectious disease  V                   1.76     $89.18       $19.66       $17.84
            Visits.
+91599...  High Level Clinic   Unknown cause of    V                   1.31     $66.38       $20.79       $13.28
            Visits.             mortality.
919......  Electroconvulsive   ..................  S                   3.17    $160.62       $80.00       $32.12
            Therapy.
920......  Biofeedback and     ..................  S                   1.17     $59.28       $29.61       $11.86
            other Training.
*921.....  Diabetes Education  ..................  S              .........  .........  ...........  ...........
926......  Dialysis for other  ..................  S                   4.28    $216.87       $69.83       $43.37
            than ESRD
            patients.
928......  Alimentary Tests..  ..................  X                   3.11    $157.58       $83.85       $31.52
930......  Minor Eye           ..................  X                   1.02     $51.68       $22.83       $10.34
            Examinations.
931......  Level I Eye Tests.  ..................  X                   0.74     $37.50       $21.47        $7.50
932......  Level II Eye Tests  ..................  X                   2.52    $127.69       $65.09       $25.54
936......  Fitting of Vision   ..................  X                   0.52     $26.35        $9.49        $5.27
            Aids.
940......  Otorhinolaryngolog  ..................  X                   3.04    $154.04       $51.98       $30.81
            ic Function Tests.
941......  Level I Audiometry  ..................  X                   0.74     $37.50       $13.56        $7.50
942......  Level II            ..................  X                   1.48     $74.99       $22.15       $15.00
            Audiometry.
947......  Resuscitation and   ..................  S                   4.07    $206.22      $109.61       $41.24
            Cardioversion.
948......  Cardiac             ..................  X                   0.81     $41.04       $16.95        $8.21
            Rehabilitation.
949......  Cardiovascular      ..................  X                   1.46     $73.98       $62.83       $14.80
            Stress Test.
950......  Electrocardiogram   ..................  X                   0.35     $17.73       $15.82        $3.55
            (ECG).
+95111...  Low Level ER        Well care and       V                   1.06     $53.71       $12.66       $10.74
            Visits.             administrative.
95118....  Low Level ER        Skin and breast     V                   1.17     $59.28       $19.21       $11.86
            Visits.             diseases.
95124....  Low Level ER        Musculoskeletal     V                   1.17     $59.28       $19.89       $11.86
            Visits.             diseases.
95131....  Low Level ER        Ear, nose, mouth    V                   1.11     $56.24       $17.63       $11.25
            Visits.             and throat
                                diseases.
95133....  Low Level ER        Respiratory system  V                   1.15     $58.27       $18.31       $11.65
            Visits.             diseases.
95136....  Low Level ER        Cardiovascular      V                   1.24     $62.83       $19.89       $12.57
            Visits.             system diseases.
95141....  Low Level ER        Digestive system    V                   1.30     $65.87       $21.02       $13.17
            Visits.             diseases.
95153....  Low Level ER        Kidney, urinary     V                   1.43     $72.46       $24.41       $14.49
            Visits.             tract and male
                                genital diseases.
95156....  Low Level ER        Female genital      V                   1.41     $71.44       $23.73       $14.29
            Visits.             system diseases.
95157....  Low Level ER        Pregnancy and       V                   1.44     $72.96       $24.18       $14.59
            Visits.             neonatal care.
95163....  Low Level ER        Nervous system      V                   1.31     $66.38       $22.83       $13.28
            Visits.             diseases.
95168....  Low Level ER        Eye diseases......  V                   1.20     $60.80       $20.79       $12.16
            Visits.
95172....  Low Level ER        Trauma and          V                   1.28     $64.86       $22.15       $12.97
            Visits.             poisoning.
95178....  Low Level ER        Major signs,        V                   2.02    $102.35       $37.97       $20.47
            Visits.             symptoms and
                                findings.
95182....  Low Level ER        Endocrine,          V                   1.50     $76.00       $24.63       $15.20
            Visits.             nutritional and
                                metabolic
                                diseases.
95186....  Low Level ER        Immunologic and     V                   1.43     $72.46       $25.76       $14.49
            Visits.             hematologic
                                diseases.
95188....  Low Level ER        Malignancy........  V                   1.52     $77.02       $26.44       $15.40
            Visits.
95191....  Low Level ER        Psychiatric         V                   1.09     $55.23       $14.01       $11.05
            Visits.             Disorders.
95197....  Low Level ER        Infectious disease  V                   1.24     $62.83       $20.57       $12.57
            Visits.
+95199...  Low Level ER        Unknown cause of    V                   1.31     $66.38       $20.79       $13.28
            Visits.             mortality.
+95311...  Mid Level ER        Well care and       V                   1.06     $53.71       $12.66       $10.74
            Visits.             administrative.
95318....  Mid Level ER        Skin and breast     V                   1.89     $95.77       $34.80       $19.15
            Visits.             diseases.

[[Page 47620]]


95324....  Mid Level ER        Musculoskeletal     V                   1.78     $90.19       $32.32       $18.04
            Visits.             diseases.
95331....  Mid Level ER        Ear, nose, mouth    V                   1.81     $91.71       $31.64       $18.34
            Visits.             and throat
                                diseases.
95333....  Mid Level ER        Respiratory system  V                   1.91     $96.78       $33.67       $19.36
            Visits.             diseases.
95336....  Mid Level ER        Cardiovascular      V                   2.02    $102.35       $36.16       $20.47
            Visits.             system diseases.
95341....  Mid Level ER        Digestive system    V                   2.02    $102.35       $36.61       $20.47
            Visits.             diseases.
95353....  Mid Level ER        Kidney, urinary     V                   2.06    $104.38       $38.19       $20.88
            Visits.             tract and male
                                genital diseases.
95356....  Mid Level ER        Female genital      V                   2.04    $103.37       $36.61       $20.67
            Visits.             system diseases.
95357....  Mid Level ER        Pregnancy and       V                   2.06    $104.38       $39.78       $20.88
            Visits.             neonatal care.
95363....  Mid Level ER        Nervous system      V                   2.00    $101.34       $37.29       $20.27
            Visits.             diseases.
95368....  Mid Level ER        Eye diseases......  V                   1.69     $85.63       $33.00       $17.13
            Visits.
95372....  Mid Level ER        Trauma and          V                   2.02    $102.35       $38.87       $20.47
            Visits.             poisoning.
95378....  Mid Level ER        Major signs,        V                   3.07    $155.56       $58.76       $31.11
            Visits.             symptoms and
                                findings.
95382....  Mid Level ER        Endocrine,          V                   2.30    $116.54       $43.62       $23.31
            Visits.             nutritional and
                                metabolic
                                diseases.
95386....  Mid Level ER        Immunologic and     V                   2.39    $121.10       $47.01       $24.22
            Visits.             hematologic
                                diseases.
95388....  Mid Level ER        Malignancy........  V                   2.15    $108.94       $41.13       $21.79
            Visits.
95391....  Mid Level ER        Psychiatric         V                   2.00    $101.34       $35.93       $20.27
            Visits.             Disorders.
95397....  Mid Level ER        Infectious disease  V                   1.98    $100.33       $36.61       $20.07
            Visits.
+95399...  Mid Level ER        Unknown cause of    V                   1.31     $66.38       $20.79       $13.28
            Visits.             mortality.
+95511...  High Level ER       Well care and       V                   1.06     $53.71       $12.66       $10.74
            Visits.             administrative.
95518....  High Level ER       Skin and breast     V                   2.61    $132.25       $46.56       $26.45
            Visits.             diseases.
95524....  High Level ER       Musculoskeletal     V                   2.44    $123.63       $41.36       $24.73
            Visits.             diseases.
95531....  High Level ER       Ear, nose, mouth    V                   2.56    $129.71       $44.07       $25.94
            Visits.             and throat
                                diseases.
95533....  High Level ER       Respiratory system  V                   3.19    $161.64       $54.69       $32.33
            Visits.             diseases.
95536....  High Level ER       Cardiovascular      V                   3.17    $160.62       $54.69       $32.12
            Visits.             system diseases.
95541....  High Level ER       Digestive system    V                   2.89    $146.43       $54.69       $29.29
            Visits.             diseases.
95553....  High Level ER       Kidney, urinary     V                   2.89    $146.43       $54.69       $29.29
            Visits.             tract and male
                                genital diseases.
95556....  High Level ER       Female genital      V                   2.73    $138.33       $50.85       $27.67
            Visits.             system diseases.
95557....  High Level ER       Pregnancy and       V                   2.93    $148.46       $54.92       $29.69
            Visits.             neonatal care.
95563....  High Level ER       Nervous system      V                   3.04    $154.04       $58.08       $30.81
            Visits.             diseases.
95568....  High Level ER       Eye diseases......  V                   2.31    $117.05       $40.00       $23.41
            Visits.
95572....  High Level ER       Trauma and          V                   2.74    $138.83       $50.17       $27.77
            Visits.             poisoning.
95578....  High Level ER       Major signs,        V                   6.85    $347.09      $148.48       $69.42
            Visits.             symptoms and
                                findings.
95582....  High Level ER       Endocrine,          V                   3.28    $166.20       $64.64       $33.24
            Visits.             nutritional and
                                metabolic
                                diseases.
95586....  High Level ER       Immunologic and     V                   3.70    $187.48       $74.35       $37.50
            Visits.             hematologic
                                diseases.
95588....  High Level ER       Malignancy........  V                   3.67    $185.96       $61.70       $37.19
            Visits.
95591....  High Level ER       Psychiatric         V                   3.48    $176.33       $62.38       $35.27
            Visits.             Disorders.
95597....  High Level ER       Infectious disease  V                   2.81    $142.38       $53.34       $28.48
            Visits.
+95599...  High Level ER       Unknown cause of    V                   1.31     $66.38       $20.79       $13.28
            Visits.             mortality.
956......  Continuous ECG and  ..................  X                   1.11     $56.24       $55.82       $11.25
            Blood Pressure
            Monitoring.
957......  Echocardiography..  ..................  S                   2.83    $143.39      $117.07       $28.68
958......  Diagnostic Cardiac  ..................  T                  26.11  $1,322.98      $659.47      $264.60
            Catheterization.
960......  Cardiac             ..................  S                   4.24    $214.84      $144.41       $42.97
            Electrophysiologi
            c Tests/
            Procedures.
966......  Electronic          ..................  X                   0.39     $19.76       $12.43        $3.95
            Analysis of
            Pacemakers/other
            Devices.
967......  Non-Invasive        ..................  X                   1.70     $86.14       $57.40       $17.23
            Vascular Studies.
968......  Vascular            ..................  X                   2.37    $120.09       $79.55       $24.02
            Ultrasound.
969......  Hyperbaric Oxygen.  ..................  S                   2.65    $134.27      $141.70       $26.85
971......  Level I Pulmonary   ..................  X                   0.78     $39.52       $21.47        $7.90
            Tests.
972......  Level II Pulmonary  ..................  X                   1.02     $51.68       $29.38       $10.34
            Tests.
973......  Level III           ..................  S                   1.89     $95.77       $55.82       $19.15
            Pulmonary Tests.
976......  Pulmonary Therapy.  ..................  S                   0.44     $22.29       $14.92        $4.46
977......  Allergy Tests.....  ..................  X                   0.63     $31.92       $12.66        $6.38
978......  Allergy Injections  ..................  X                   0.31     $15.71        $3.39        $3.14
979......  Extended EEG        ..................  S                  10.17    $515.31      $288.83      $103.06
            Studies and Sleep
            Studies.
980......  Electroencephalogr  ..................  S                   2.15    $108.94       $57.86       $21.79
            am.
*981.....  Level I Nerve and   ..................  X                   1.46     $73.98       $41.81       $14.80
            Muscle Tests.
*982.....  Level II Nerve and  ..................  X                   1.39     $70.43       $38.87       $14.09
            Muscle Tests.
987......  Subcutaneous or     ..................  S                   0.65     $32.94       $13.33        $6.59
            Intramuscular
            Chemotherapy.
988......  Chemotherapy        ..................  S                   4.15    $210.28       $97.52       $42.06
            except by
            Extended Infusion.
989......  Chemotherapy by     ..................  S                   1.72     $87.15       $40.68       $17.43
            Extended Infusion.
990......  Photochemotherapy.  ..................  S                   0.43     $21.79        $8.14        $4.36
997......  Manipulation        ..................  S                   0.69     $34.96        $7.23        $6.99
            Therapy.
999......  Therapeutic         ..................  X                   0.43     $21.79       $10.85        $4.36
            Phlebotomy.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------





  <hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond><hbond>
<hbond><hbond>

[[Page 47621]]

Addendum B.--Proposed Hospital Outpatient Department (HOPD) Payment Status by HCPCS Code and Related Information
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                              Proposed    National     Minimum
CPT \1\/      HOPD status           Description         Proposed   Relative   payment    unadjusted   unadjusted
  HCPCS        indicator                                  APC       weight      rate    coinsurance  coinsurance
---\2\----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
00100...  N                   Anesth, skin surgery...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00102...  N                   Anesth, repair of cleft  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lip.
00103...  N                   Anesth, blepharoplasty.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00104...  N                   Anesth for electroshock  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00120...  N                   Anesthesia for ear       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00124...  N                   Anesthesia for ear exam  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00126...  N                   Anesth, tympanotomy....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00140...  N                   Anesth, procedures on    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               eye.
00142...  N                   Anesthesia for lens      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00144...  N                   Anesth, corneal          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               transplant.
00145...  N                   Anesth, vitrectomy.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00147...  N                   Anesth, iridectomy.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00148...  N                   Anesthesia for eye exam  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00160...  N                   Anesth, nose, sinus      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00162...  N                   Anesth, nose, sinus      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00164...  N                   Anesth, biopsy of nose.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00170...  N                   Anesth, procedure on     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               mouth.
00172...  N                   Anesth, cleft palate     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
00174...  C                   Anesth, pharyngeal       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00176...  C                   Anesth, pharyngeal       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00190...  N                   Anesth, facial bone      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00192...  C                   Anesth, facial bone      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00210...  N                   Anesth, open head        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00212...  N                   Anesth, skull drainage.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00214...  C                   Anesth, skull drainage.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00215...  C                   Anesth, skull fracture.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00216...  N                   Anesth, head vessel      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00218...  N                   Anesth, special head     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00220...  N                   Anesth, spinal fluid     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shunt.
00222...  N                   Anesth, head nerve       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00300...  N                   Anesth, skin surgery,    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               neck.
00320...  N                   Anesth, neck organ       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00322...  N                   Anesth, biopsy of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               thyroid.
00350...  N                   Anesth, neck vessel      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00352...  N                   Anesth, neck vessel      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00400...  N                   Anesth, chest skin       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00402...  N                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               breast.
00404...  C                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               breast.
00406...  C                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               breast.
00410...  N                   Anesth, correct heart    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               rhythm.
00420...  N                   Anesth, skin surgery,    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               back.
00450...  N                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulder.
00452...  C                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulder.
00454...  N                   Anesth, collarbone       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               biopsy.
00470...  N                   Anesth, removal of rib.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00472...  N                   Anesth, chest wall       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
00474...  C                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               rib(s).
00500...  N                   Anesth, esophageal       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00520...  N                   Anesth, chest procedure  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00522...  N                   Anesth, chest lining     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               biopsy.
00524...  C                   Anesth, chest drainage.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00528...  N                   Anesth, chest partition  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               view.
00530...  C                   Anesth, pacemaker        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               insertion.
00532...  N                   Anesth, vascular access  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00534...  N                   Anesth, cardioverter/    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               defib.
00540...  C                   Anesth, chest surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00542...  C                   Anesth, release of lung  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00544...  C                   Anesth, chest lining     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
00546...  C                   Anesth, lung,chest wall  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00548...  N                   Anesth, trachea,bronchi  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00560...  C                   Anesth, open heart       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00562...  C                   Anesth, open heart       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00580...  C                   Anesth,heart/lung        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               transplant.
00600...  N                   Anesth, spine, cord      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00604...  C                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
00620...  N                   Anesth, spine, cord      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00622...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               nerves.
00630...  N                   Anesth, spine, cord      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00632...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               nerves.
00634...  C                   Anesth for               .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               chemonucleolysis.
00670...  C                   Anesth, spine, cord      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00700...  N                   Anesth, abdominal wall   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00702...  N                   Anesth, for liver        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               biopsy.
00730...  N                   Anesth, abdominal wall   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00740...  N                   Anesth, gi               .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               visualization.

[[Page 47622]]


00750...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hernia.
00752...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hernia.
00754...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hernia.
00756...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hernia.
00770...  N                   Anesth, blood vessel     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
00790...  N                   Anesth, surg upper       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               abdomen.
00792...  C                   Anesth, part liver       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
00794...  C                   Anesth, pancreas         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
00796...  C                   Anesth, for liver        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               transplant.
00800...  N                   Anesth, abdominal wall   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00802...  C                   Anesth, fat layer        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
00810...  N                   Anesth, intestine        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               endoscopy.
00820...  N                   Anesth, abdominal wall   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00830...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hernia.
00832...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hernia.
00840...  N                   Anesth, surg lower       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               abdomen.
00842...  N                   Anesth, amniocentesis..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00844...  C                   Anesth, pelvis surgery.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00846...  C                   Anesth, hysterectomy...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00848...  C                   Anesth, pelvic organ     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00850...  C                   Anesth, cesarean         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               section.
00855...  C                   Anesth, hysterectomy...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00857...  C                   Analgesia, labor & c-    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               section.
00860...  N                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               abdomen.
00862...  N                   Anesth, kidney, ureter   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00864...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bladder.
00865...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prostate.
00866...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               adrenal.
00868...  C                   Anesth, kidney           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               transplant.
00870...  N                   Anesth, bladder stone    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00872...  N                   Anesth,kidney stone      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               destruct.
00873...  N                   Anesth,kidney stone      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               destruct.
00880...  N                   Anesth, abdomen vessel   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00882...  C                   Anesth, major vein       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               ligation.
00884...  C                   Anesth, major vein       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               revision.
00900...  N                   Anesth, perineal         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
00902...  N                   Anesth, anorectal        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00904...  C                   Anesth, perineal         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00906...  N                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vulva.
00908...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prostate.
00910...  N                   Anesth, bladder surgery  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00912...  N                   Anesth, bladder tumor    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
00914...  N                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prostate.
00916...  N                   Anesth, bleeding         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               control.
00918...  N                   Anesth, stone removal..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
00920...  N                   Anesth, genitalia        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00922...  N                   Anesth, sperm duct       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
00924...  N                   Anesth, testis           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               exploration.
00926...  N                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               testis.
00928...  C                   Anesth, removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               testis.
00930...  N                   Anesth, testis           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               suspension.
00932...  C                   Anesth, amputation of    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               penis.
00934...  C                   Anesth, penis, nodes     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
00936...  C                   Anesth, penis, nodes     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
00938...  N                   Anesth, insert penis     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
00940...  N                   Anesth, vaginal          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedures.
00942...  N                   Anesth, surgery on       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vagina.
00944...  C                   Anesth, vaginal          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hysterectomy.
00946...  N                   Anesth, vaginal          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               delivery.
00948...  N                   Anesth, repair of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cervix.
00950...  N                   Anesth, vaginal          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               endoscopy.
00952...  N                   Anesth, uterine          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               endoscopy.
00955...  C                   Analgesia, vaginal       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               delivery.
01000...  N                   Anesth, skin surgery,    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               pelvis.
01110...  N                   Anesth, skin surgery,    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               pelvis.
01120...  N                   Anesth, pelvis surgery.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01130...  N                   Anesth, body cast        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01140...  C                   Anesth, amputation at    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               pelvis.
01150...  C                   Anesth, pelvic tumor     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01160...  N                   Anesth, pelvis           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01170...  N                   Anesth, pelvis surgery.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01180...  N                   Anesth, pelvis nerve     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
01190...  C                   Anesth, pelvis nerve     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               removal.
01200...  N                   Anesth, hip joint        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01202...  N                   Anesth, arthroscopy of   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hip.

[[Page 47623]]


01210...  N                   Anesth, hip joint        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01212...  C                   Anesth, hip              .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               disarticulation.
01214...  C                   Anesth, replacement of   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hip.
01220...  N                   Anesth, procedure on     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               femur.
01230...  N                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               femur.
01232...  C                   Anesth, amputation of    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               femur.
01234...  C                   Anesth, radical femur    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01240...  N                   Anesth, upper leg skin   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01250...  N                   Anesth, upper leg        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01260...  N                   Anesth, upper leg veins  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01270...  N                   Anesth, thigh arteries   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01272...  C                   Anesth, femoral artery   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01274...  C                   Anesth, femoral          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               embolectomy.
01300...  N                   Anesth, skin surgery,    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               knee.
01320...  N                   Anesth, knee area        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01340...  N                   Anesth, knee area        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01360...  N                   Anesth, knee area        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01380...  N                   Anesth, knee joint       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01382...  N                   Anesth, knee             .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               arthroscopy.
01390...  N                   Anesth, knee area        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01392...  N                   Anesth, knee area        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01400...  N                   Anesth, knee joint       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01402...  C                   Anesth, replacement of   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               knee.
01404...  C                   Anesth, amputation at    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               knee.
01420...  N                   Anesth, knee joint       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               casting.
01430...  N                   Anesth, knee veins       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01432...  N                   Anesth, knee vessel      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01440...  N                   Anesth, knee arteries    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01442...  C                   Anesth, knee artery      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01444...  C                   Anesth, knee artery      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
01460...  N                   Anesth, lower leg skin   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01462...  N                   Anesth, lower leg        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01464...  N                   Anesth, ankle            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               arthroscopy.
01470...  N                   Anesth, lower leg        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01472...  N                   Anesth, achilles tendon  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01474...  N                   Anesth, lower leg        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01480...  N                   Anesth, lower leg bone   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01482...  N                   Anesth, radical leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01484...  N                   Anesth, lower leg        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               revision.
01486...  C                   Anesth, ankle            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
01490...  N                   Anesth, lower leg        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               casting.
01500...  N                   Anesth, leg arteries     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01502...  C                   Anesth, lowerleg         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               embolectomy.
01520...  N                   Anesth, lower leg vein   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01522...  N                   Anesth, lower leg vein   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01600...  N                   Anesth, shoulder skin    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01610...  N                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulder.
01620...  N                   Anesth, shoulder         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01622...  N                   Anesth, shoulder         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               arthroscopy.
01630...  N                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulder.
01632...  C                   Anesth, surgery of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulder.
01634...  C                   Anesth, shoulder joint   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               amput.
01636...  C                   Anesth, forequarter      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               amput.
01638...  C                   Anesth, shoulder         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
01650...  N                   Anesth, shoulder artery  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01652...  C                   Anesth, shoulder vessel  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01654...  C                   Anesth, shoulder vessel  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01656...  C                   Anesth, arm-leg vessel   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01670...  N                   Anesth, shoulder vein    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01680...  N                   Anesth, shoulder         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               casting.
01682...  N                   Anesth, airplane cast..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01700...  N                   Anesth, elbow area skin  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01710...  N                   Anesth, elbow area       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01712...  N                   Anesth, upperarm tendon  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01714...  N                   Anesth, upperarm tendon  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01716...  N                   Anesth, biceps tendon    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
01730...  N                   Anesth, upperarm         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01732...  N                   Anesth, elbow            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               arthroscopy.
01740...  N                   Anesth, upper arm        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01742...  N                   Anesth, humerus surgery  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01744...  N                   Anesth, humerus repair.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01756...  C                   Anesth, radical humerus  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01758...  N                   Anesth, humeral lesion   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01760...  N                   Anesth, elbow            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
01770...  N                   Anesth, upperarm artery  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.

[[Page 47624]]


01772...  C                   Anesth, upperarm         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               embolectomy.
01780...  N                   Anesth, upper arm vein   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01782...  C                   Anesth, upperarm vein    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
01784...  N                   Anesth, av fistula       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
01800...  N                   Anesth, lower arm skin   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01810...  N                   Anesth, lower arm        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01820...  N                   Anesth, lower arm        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
01830...  N                   Anesth, lower arm        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
01832...  N                   Anesth, wrist            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
01840...  N                   Anesth, lowerarm artery  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01842...  C                   Anesth, lowerarm         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               embolectomy.
01844...  N                   Anesth, vascular shunt   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01850...  N                   Anesth, lower arm vein   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surg.
01852...  C                   Anesth, lowerarm vein    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               repair.
01860...  N                   Anesth, lower arm        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               casting.
01900...  N                   Anesth, uterus/tube      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               inject.
01902...  C                   Anesth, burr holes,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               skull.
01904...  C                   Anesth, skull x-ray      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               inject.
01906...  N                   Anesth, lumbar           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               myelography.
01908...  N                   Anesth, cervical         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               myelography.
01910...  N                   Anesth, skull            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               myelography.
01912...  N                   Anesth, lumbar           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               discography.
01914...  N                   Anesth, cervical         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               discography.
01916...  C                   Anesth, head             .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               arteriogram.
01918...  C                   Anesth, limb             .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               arteriogram.
01920...  N                   Anesth, catheterize      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               heart.
01921...  C                   Anesth, vessel surgery.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01922...  N                   Anesth, cat or MRI scan  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01990...  C                   Support for organ donor  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
01995...  N                   Regional anesthesia,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               limb.
01996...  N                   Manage daily drug        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               therapy.
01999...  N                   Unlisted anesth          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
10040...  T                   Acne surgery of skin           131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               abscess.
10060...  T                   Drainage of skin               131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               abscess.
10061...  T                   Drainage of skin               131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               abscess.
10080...  T                   Drainage of pilonidal          131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               cyst.
10081...  T                   Drainage of pilonidal          131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               cyst.
10120...  T                   Remove foreign body....        131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
10121...  T                   Remove foreign body....        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
10140...  T                   Drainage of hematoma/          131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               fluid.
10160...  T                   Puncture drainage of           131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               lesion.
10180...  T                   Complex drainage, wound        131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
11000...  T                   Debride infected skin..        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11001...  T                   Debride infect skin add        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11010...  T                   Debride skin, fx.......        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11011...  T                   Debride skin/muscle, fx        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11012...  T                   Debride skin/muscle/           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               bone, fx.
11040...  T                   Debride skin partial...        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11041...  T                   Debride skin full......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11042...  T                   Debride skin/tissue....        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11043...  T                   Debride tissue/muscle..        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
11044...  T                   Debride tissue/muscle/         162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               bone.
11055...  T                   Trim skin lesion.......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11056...  T                   Trim 2 to 4 skin               151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
11057...  T                   Trim over 4 skin               151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
11100...  T                   Biopsy of skin lesion..        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11101...  T                   Biopsy, each added             161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               lesion.
11200...  T                   Removal of skin tags...        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11201...  T                   Removal of added skin          151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               tags.
11300...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11301...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11302...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11303...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11305...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11306...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11307...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11308...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11310...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11311...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11312...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11313...  T                   Shave skin lesion......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11400...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11401...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11402...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11403...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02

[[Page 47625]]


11404...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
11406...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11420...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11421...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11422...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11423...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11424...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
11426...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11440...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11441...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11442...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11443...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11444...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
11446...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11450...  T                   Removal, sweat gland           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11451...  T                   Removal, sweat gland           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11462...  T                   Removal, sweat gland           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11463...  T                   Removal, sweat gland           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11470...  T                   Removal, sweat gland           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11471...  T                   Removal, sweat gland           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11600...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11601...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11602...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11603...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11604...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
11606...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11620...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11621...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11622...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11623...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11624...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11626...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11640...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11641...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11642...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11643...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11644...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11646...  T                   Removal of skin lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
11719...  T                   Trim nail(s)...........        137       0.46     $24.49        $4.90        $4.90
11720...  T                   Debride nail, 1-5......        137       0.46     $24.49        $4.90        $4.90
11721...  T                   Debride nail, 6 or more        137       0.46     $24.49        $4.90        $4.90
11730...  T                   Removal of nail plate..        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
11731...  T                   Removal of second nail         151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               plate.
11732...  T                   Remove additional nail         151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               plate.
11740...  T                   Drain blood from under         137       0.46     $24.49        $4.90        $4.90
                               nail.
11750...  T                   Removal of nail bed....        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
11752...  T                   Remove nail bed/finger         163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               tip.
11755...  T                   Biopsy, nail unit......        137       0.46     $24.49        $4.90        $4.90
11760...  T                   Reconstruction of nail         181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               bed.
11762...  T                   Reconstruction of nail         181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               bed.
11765...  T                   Excision of nail fold,         151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               toe.
11770...  T                   Removal of pilonidal           162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               lesion.
11771...  T                   Removal of pilonidal           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11772...  T                   Removal of pilonidal           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
11900...  T                   Injection into skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
11901...  T                   Added skin lesions             151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               injection.
11920...  T                   Correct skin color             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11921...  T                   Correct skin color             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11922...  T                   Correct skin color             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11950...  T                   Therapy for contour            181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11951...  T                   Therapy for contour            181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11952...  T                   Therapy for contour            181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11954...  T                   Therapy for contour            181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               defects.
11960...  T                   Insert tissue                  183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               expander(s).
11970...  T                   Replace tissue expander        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
11971...  T                   Remove tissue                  163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               expander(s).
11975...  E                   Insert contraceptive     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cap.
11976...  T                   Removal of                     131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               contraceptive cap.
11977...  E                   Removal/reinsert contra  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cap.
12001...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12002...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12004...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12005...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12006...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12007...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).

[[Page 47626]]


12011...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12013...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12014...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12015...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12016...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12017...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12018...  T                   Repair superficial             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12020...  T                   Closure of split wound.        181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
12021...  T                   Closure of split wound.        181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
12031...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12032...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12034...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12035...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12036...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12037...  T                   Layer closure of               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               wound(s).
12041...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12042...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12044...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12045...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12046...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12047...  T                   Layer closure of               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               wound(s).
12051...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12052...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12053...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12054...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12055...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12056...  T                   Layer closure of               181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               wound(s).
12057...  T                   Layer closure of               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               wound(s).
13100...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13101...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13120...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13121...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13131...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13132...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13150...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13151...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13152...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
13160...  T                   Late closure of wound..        182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
13300...  T                   Repair of wound or             182       4.00    $211.56       $84.98       $42.31
                               lesion.
14000...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14001...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14020...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14021...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14040...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14041...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14060...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14061...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14300...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
14350...  T                   Skin tissue                    183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               rearrangement.
15000...  T                   Skin graft procedure...        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15050...  T                   Skin pinch graft               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15100...  T                   Skin split graft               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15101...  T                   Skin split graft               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15120...  T                   Skin split graft               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15121...  T                   Skin split graft               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15200...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15201...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15220...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15221...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15240...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15241...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15260...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15261...  T                   Skin full graft                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15350...  T                   Skin homograft                 183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15400...  T                   Skin heterograft               183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               procedure.
15570...  T                   Form skin pedicle flap.        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15572...  T                   Form skin pedicle flap.        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15574...  T                   Form skin pedicle flap.        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15576...  T                   Form skin pedicle flap.        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15580...  T                   Attach skin pedicle            183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               graft.
15600...  T                   Skin graft procedure...        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15610...  T                   Skin graft procedure...        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15620...  T                   Skin graft procedure...        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15625...  T                   Skin graft procedure...        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15630...  T                   Skin graft procedure...        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12

[[Page 47627]]


15650...  T                   Transfer skin pedicle          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               flap.
15732...  T                   Muscle-skin graft, head/       184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               neck.
15734...  T                   Muscle-skin graft,             184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               trunk.
15736...  T                   Muscle-skin graft, arm.        184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
15738...  T                   Muscle-skin graft, leg.        184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
15740...  T                   Island pedicle flap            184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               graft.
15750...  T                   Neurovascular pedicle          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               graft.
15756...  C                   Free muscle flap,        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
15757...  C                   Free skin flap,          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
15758...  C                   Free fascial flap,       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
15760...  T                   Composite skin graft...        184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
15770...  T                   Derma-fat-fascia graft.        184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
15775...  T                   Hair transplant punch          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               grafts.
15776...  T                   Hair transplant punch          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               grafts.
15780...  T                   Abrasion treatment of          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               skin.
15781...  T                   Abrasion treatment of          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               skin.
15782...  T                   Abrasion treatment of          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               skin.
15783...  T                   Abrasion treatment of          151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               skin.
15786...  T                   Abrasion treatment of          151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesion.
15787...  T                   Abrasion, added skin           151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
15788...  T                   Chemical peel, face,           151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               epiderm.
15789...  T                   Chemical peel, face,           151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               dermal.
15792...  T                   Chemical peel,                 151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               nonfacial.
15793...  T                   Chemical peel,                 151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               nonfacial.
15810...  T                   Salabrasion............        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
15811...  T                   Salabrasion............        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
15819...  T                   Plastic surgery, neck..        183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
15820...  T                   Revision of lower              183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               eyelid.
15821...  T                   Revision of lower              183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               eyelid.
15822...  T                   Revision of upper              183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               eyelid.
15823...  T                   Revision of upper              183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               eyelid.
15824...  T                   Removal of forehead            184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               wrinkles.
15825...  T                   Removal of neck                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               wrinkles.
15826...  T                   Removal of brow                184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               wrinkles.
15828...  T                   Removal of face                184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               wrinkles.
15829...  T                   Removal of skin                183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               wrinkles.
15831...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15832...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15833...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15834...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15835...  T                   Excise excessive skin          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               tissue.
15836...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15837...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15838...  T                   Excise excessive skin          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               tissue.
15839...  T                   Excise excessive skin          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               tissue.
15840...  T                   Graft for face nerve           184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               palsy.
15841...  T                   Graft for face nerve           184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               palsy.
15842...  T                   Graft for face nerve           184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               palsy.
15845...  T                   Skin and muscle repair,        184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               face.
15850...  T                   Removal of sutures.....        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
15851...  T                   Removal of sutures.....        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
15852...  T                   Dressing change, not           151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               for burn.
15860...  N                   Test for blood flow in   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               graft.
15876...  T                   Suction assisted               184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               lipectomy.
15877...  T                   Suction assisted               184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               lipectomy.
15878...  T                   Suction assisted               184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               lipectomy.
15879...  T                   Suction assisted               184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               lipectomy.
15920...  T                   Removal of tail bone           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               ulcer.
15922...  T                   Removal of tail bone           184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               ulcer.
15931...  T                   Remove sacrum pressure         163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
15933...  T                   Remove sacrum pressure         163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
15934...  T                   Remove sacrum pressure         184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15935...  T                   Remove sacrum pressure         184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15936...  T                   Remove sacrum pressure         184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15937...  T                   Remove sacrum pressure         184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15940...  T                   Removal of pressure            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
15941...  T                   Removal of pressure            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
15944...  T                   Removal of pressure            184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15945...  T                   Removal of pressure            184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15946...  T                   Removal of pressure            184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15950...  T                   Remove thigh pressure          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
15951...  T                   Remove thigh pressure          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
15952...  T                   Remove thigh pressure          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15953...  T                   Remove thigh pressure          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15956...  T                   Remove thigh pressure          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.

[[Page 47628]]


15958...  T                   Remove thigh pressure          184      15.17    $802.17      $396.40      $160.43
                               sore.
15999...  T                   Removal of pressure            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               sore.
16000...  T                   Initial treatment of           151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               burn(s).
16010...  T                   Treatment of burn(s)...        152      10.43    $551.43      $261.71      $110.29
16015...  T                   Treatment of burn(s)...        152      10.43    $551.43      $261.71      $110.29
16020...  T                   Treatment of burn(s)...        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
16025...  T                   Treatment of burn(s)...        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
16030...  T                   Treatment of burn(s)...        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
16035...  T                   Incision of burn scab..        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
16040...  T                   Burn wound excision....        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
16041...  T                   Burn wound excision....        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
16042...  T                   Burn wound excision....        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
17000...  T                   Destroy benign/premal          141       0.59     $31.34        $9.49        $6.27
                               lesion.
17003...  T                   Destroy 2-14 lesions...        141       0.59     $31.34        $9.49        $6.27
17004...  T                   Destroy 15 & more              142       3.78    $199.81       $73.00       $39.96
                               lesions.
17106...  T                   Destruction of skin            141       0.59     $31.34        $9.49        $6.27
                               lesions.
17107...  T                   Destruction of skin            142       3.78    $199.81       $73.00       $39.96
                               lesions.
17108...  T                   Destruction of skin            142       3.78    $199.81       $73.00       $39.96
                               lesions.
17110...  T                   Destruct lesion, 1-14..        141       0.59     $31.34        $9.49        $6.27
17111...  T                   Destruct lesion, 15 or         142       3.78    $199.81       $73.00       $39.96
                               more.
17250...  T                   Chemical cautery,              151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               tissue.
17260...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17261...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17262...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17263...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17264...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17266...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17270...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17271...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17272...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17273...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17274...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17276...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17280...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17281...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17282...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17283...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17284...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17286...  T                   Destruction of skin            151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               lesions.
17304...  T                   Chemosurgery of skin           162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               lesion.
17305...  T                   2nd stage chemosurgery.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
17306...  T                   3rd stage chemosurgery.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
17307...  T                   Followup skin lesion           162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               therapy.
17310...  T                   Extensive skin                 162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               chemosurgery.
17340...  T                   Cryotherapy of skin....        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
17360...  T                   Skin peel therapy......        151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
17380...  T                   Hair removal by                151       1.74     $92.07       $35.71       $18.41
                               electrolysis.
17999...  T                   Skin tissue procedure..        121       0.67     $35.26       $21.02        $7.05
19000...  T                   Drainage of breast             121       0.67     $35.26       $21.02        $7.05
                               lesion.
19001...  T                   Drain added breast             121       0.67     $35.26       $21.02        $7.05
                               lesion.
19020...  T                   Incision of breast             132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
                               lesion.
19030...  T                   Injection for breast x-        347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               ray.
19100...  T                   Biopsy of breast.......        122       4.87    $257.60      $115.03       $51.52
19101...  T                   Biopsy of breast.......        197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
19110...  T                   Nipple exploration.....        197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
19112...  T                   Excise breast duct             197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               fistula.
19120...  T                   Removal of breast              197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               lesion.
19125...  T                   Excision, breast lesion        197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
19126...  T                   Excision, add'l breast         197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               lesion.
19140...  T                   Removal of breast              197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               tissue.
19160...  T                   Removal of breast              198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               tissue.
19162...  T                   Remove breast tissue,          198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               nodes.
19180...  T                   Removal of breast......        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
19182...  T                   Removal of breast......        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
19200...  C                   Removal of breast......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19220...  C                   Removal of breast......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19240...  C                   Removal of breast......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19260...  C                   Removal of chest wall    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lesion.
19271...  C                   Revision of chest wall.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19272...  C                   Extensive chest wall     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
19290...  T                   Place needle wire,             197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               breast.
19291...  T                   Place needle wire,             197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               breast.
19316...  T                   Suspension of breast...        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
19318...  T                   Reduction of large             198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               breast.
19324...  T                   Enlarge breast.........        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75

[[Page 47629]]


19325...  T                   Enlarge breast with            198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               implant.
19328...  T                   Removal of breast              198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               implant.
19330...  T                   Removal of implant             198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               material.
19340...  T                   Immediate breast               198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               prosthesis.
19342...  T                   Delayed breast                 198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               prosthesis.
19350...  T                   Breast reconstruction..        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
19355...  T                   Correct inverted               198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               nipple(s).
19357...  T                   Breast reconstruction..        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
19361...  C                   Breast reconstruction..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19364...  C                   Breast reconstruction..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19366...  T                   Breast reconstruction..        198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
19367...  C                   Breast reconstruction..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19368...  C                   Breast reconstruction..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19369...  C                   Breast reconstruction..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
19370...  T                   Surgery of breast              198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               capsule.
19371...  T                   Removal of breast              198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               capsule.
19380...  T                   Revise breast                  198      19.17  $1,013.73      $530.20      $202.75
                               reconstruction.
19396...  T                   Design custom breast           197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               implant.
19499...  T                   Breast surgery                 197      12.13    $641.54      $310.75      $128.31
                               procedure.
20000...  T                   Incision of abscess....        131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
20005...  T                   Incision of deep               251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               abscess.
20100...  C                   Explore wound, neck....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20101...  C                   Explore wound, chest...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20102...  C                   Explore wound, abdomen.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20103...  C                   Explore wound,           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               extremity.
20150...  C                   Excise epiphyseal bar..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20200...  T                   Muscle biopsy..........        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
20205...  T                   Deep muscle biopsy.....        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
20206...  T                   Needle biopsy, muscle..        122       4.87     $257.6      $115.03       $51.52
20220...  T                   Bone biopsy, trocar/           162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               needle.
20225...  T                   Bone biopsy, trocar/           162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               needle.
20240...  T                   Bone biopsy, excisional        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
20245...  T                   Bone biopsy, excisional        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
20250...  T                   Open bone biopsy.......        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
20251...  T                   Open bone biopsy.......        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
20500...  T                   Injection of sinus             181       2.19    $115.58       $43.84       $23.12
                               tract.
20501...  T                   Inject sinus tract for         347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               x-ray.
20520...  T                   Removal of foreign body        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
20525...  T                   Removal of foreign body        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
20550...  T                   Inj tendon/ligament/           200       1.89     $99.90       $39.10       $19.98
                               cyst.
20600...  T                   Drain/inject joint/            200       1.89     $99.90       $39.10       $19.98
                               bursa.
20605...  T                   Drain/inject joint/            200       1.89     $99.90       $39.10       $19.98
                               bursa.
20610...  T                   Drain/inject joint/            200       1.89     $99.90       $39.10       $19.98
                               bursa.
20615...  T                   Treatment of bone cyst.        121       0.67     $35.26       $21.02        $7.05
20650...  T                   Insert and remove bone         251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               pin.
20660...  C                   Apply,remove fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
20661...  C                   Application of head      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               brace.
20662...  C                   Application of pelvis    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               brace.
20663...  C                   Application of thigh     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               brace.
20664...  C                   Halo brace application.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20665...  N                   Removal of fixation      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
20670...  T                   Removal of support             162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               implant.
20680...  T                   Removal of support             163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               implant.
20690...  T                   Apply bone fixation            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               device.
20692...  T                   Apply bone fixation            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               device.
20693...  T                   Adjust bone fixation           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               device.
20694...  T                   Remove bone fixation           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               device.
20802...  C                   Replantation, arm,       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20805...  C                   Replant forearm,         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20808...  C                   Replantation, hand,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20816...  C                   Replantation digit,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20822...  C                   Replantation digit,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20824...  C                   Replantation thumb,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20827...  C                   Replantation thumb,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20838...  C                   Replantation, foot,      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               complete.
20900...  T                   Removal of bone for            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               graft.
20902...  T                   Removal of bone for            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               graft.
20910...  T                   Remove cartilage for           183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               graft.
20912...  T                   Remove cartilage for           183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               graft.
20920...  T                   Removal of fascia for          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               graft.
20922...  T                   Removal of fascia for          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               graft.
20924...  T                   Removal of tendon for          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               graft.
20926...  T                   Removal of tissue for          183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               graft.
20930...  C                   Spinal bone allograft..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20931...  C                   Spinal bone allograft..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........

[[Page 47630]]


20936...  C                   Spinal bone autograft..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20937...  C                   Spinal bone autograft..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20938...  C                   Spinal bone autograft..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
20950...  T                   Record fluid                   132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
                               pressure,muscle.
20955...  C                   Fibula bone graft,       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
20956...  C                   Iliac bone graft,        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
20957...  C                   Mt bone graft,           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
20962...  C                   Other bone graft,        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
20969...  C                   Bone/skin graft,         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               microvasc.
20970...  C                   Bone/skin graft, iliac   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               crest.
20972...  C                   Bone-skin graft,         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               metatarsal.
20973...  C                   Bone-skin graft, great   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               toe.
20974...  A                   Electrical bone          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               stimulation.
20975...  T                   Electrical bone                251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               stimulation.
20999...  N                   Musculoskeletal surgery  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21010...  T                   Incision of jaw joint..        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21015...  T                   Resection of facial            231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               tumor.
21025...  T                   Excision of bone, lower        231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               jaw.
21026...  T                   Excision of facial             231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               bone(s).
21029...  T                   Contour of face bone           231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               lesion.
21030...  T                   Removal of face bone           231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               lesion.
21031...  T                   Remove exostosis,              231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               mandible.
21032...  T                   Remove exostosis,              231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               maxilla.
21034...  T                   Removal of face bone           232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               lesion.
21040...  T                   Removal of jaw bone            231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               lesion.
21041...  T                   Removal of jaw bone            231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               lesion.
21044...  T                   Removal of jaw bone            232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               lesion.
21045...  C                   Extensive jaw surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21050...  T                   Removal of jaw joint...        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21060...  T                   Remove jaw joint               232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               cartilage.
21070...  T                   Remove coronoid process        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21076...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21077...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21079...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21080...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21081...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21082...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21083...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21084...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21085...  N                   Prepare face/oral        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prosthesis.
21086...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21087...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21088...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21089...  T                   Prepare face/oral              226       1.59     $84.23       $21.92       $16.85
                               prosthesis.
21100...  T                   Maxillofacial fixation.        231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
21110...  T                   Interdental fixation...        231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
21116...  T                   Injection, jaw joint x-        347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               ray.
21120...  T                   Reconstruction of chin.        231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
21121...  T                   Reconstruction of chin.        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21122...  T                   Reconstruction of chin.        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21123...  T                   Reconstruction of chin.        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21125...  T                   Augmentation lower jaw         231      12.02    $635.66       299.90      $127.13
                               bone.
21127...  T                   Augmentation lower jaw         232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               bone.
21137...  C                   Reduction of forehead..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21138...  C                   Reduction of forehead..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21139...  C                   Reduction of forehead..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21141...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21142...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21143...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21145...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21146...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21147...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21150...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21151...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21154...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21155...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21159...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21160...  C                   Reconstruct midface,     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lefort.
21172...  C                   Reconstruct orbit/       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               forehead.
21175...  C                   Reconstruct orbit/       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               forehead.
21179...  C                   Reconstruct entire       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               forehead.
21180...  C                   Reconstruct entire       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               forehead.
21181...  T                   Contour cranial bone           232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               lesion.
21182...  C                   Reconstruct cranial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21183...  C                   Reconstruct cranial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.

[[Page 47631]]


21184...  C                   Reconstruct cranial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21188...  C                   Reconstruction of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               midface.
21193...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21194...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21195...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21196...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21198...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21206...  T                   Reconstruct upper jaw          232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               bone.
21208...  T                   Augmentation of facial         232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               bones.
21209...  T                   Reduction of facial            232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               bones.
21210...  T                   Face bone graft........        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21215...  T                   Lower jaw bone graft...        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21230...  T                   Rib cartilage graft....        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21235...  T                   Ear cartilage graft....        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21240...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw          232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               joint.
21242...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw          232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               joint.
21243...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw          218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
                               joint.
21244...  T                   Reconstruction of lower        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               jaw.
21245...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw..        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21246...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw..        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21247...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21248...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw..        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21249...  T                   Reconstruction of jaw..        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21255...  C                   Reconstruct lower jaw    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
21256...  C                   Reconstruction of orbit  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21260...  T                   Revise eye sockets.....        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21261...  C                   Revise eye sockets.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21263...  C                   Revise eye sockets.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21267...  T                   Revise eye sockets.....        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21268...  C                   Revise eye sockets.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21270...  T                   Augmentation cheek bone        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21275...  T                   Revision orbitofacial          232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               bones.
21280...  T                   Revision of eyelid.....        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21282...  T                   Revision of eyelid.....        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21295...  T                   Revision of jaw muscle/        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               bone.
21296...  T                   Revision of jaw muscle/        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               bone.
21299...  T                   Cranio/maxillofacial           231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               surgery.
21300...  T                   Treatment of skull             231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21310...  T                   Treatment of nose              231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21315...  T                   Treatment of nose              231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21320...  T                   Treatment of nose              231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21325...  T                   Repair of nose fracture        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21330...  T                   Repair of nose fracture        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21335...  T                   Repair of nose fracture        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21336...  T                   Repair nasal septal            216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
21337...  T                   Repair nasal septal            231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21338...  T                   Repair nasoethmoid             232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21339...  T                   Repair nasoethmoid             232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21340...  T                   Repair of nose fracture        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21343...  T                   Repair of sinus                232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21344...  C                   Repair of sinus          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21345...  T                   Repair of nose/jaw             232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21346...  C                   Repair of nose/jaw       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21347...  C                   Repair of nose/jaw       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21348...  C                   Repair of nose/jaw       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21355...  T                   Repair cheek bone              231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21356...  C                   Repair cheek bone        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21360...  C                   Repair cheek bone        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21365...  C                   Repair cheek bone        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21366...  C                   Repair cheek bone        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21385...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21386...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21387...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21390...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21395...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21400...  T                   Treat eye socket               231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21401...  T                   Repair eye socket              231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21406...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21407...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21408...  C                   Repair eye socket        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21421...  T                   Treat mouth roof               232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21422...  C                   Repair mouth roof        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21423...  C                   Repair mouth roof        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21431...  C                   Treat craniofacial       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21432...  C                   Repair craniofacial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.

[[Page 47632]]


21433...  C                   Repair craniofacial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21435...  C                   Repair craniofacial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21436...  C                   Repair craniofacial      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21440...  T                   Repair dental ridge            231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21445...  T                   Repair dental ridge            232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21450...  T                   Treat lower jaw                232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21451...  T                   Treat lower jaw                231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21452...  T                   Treat lower jaw                232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21453...  T                   Treat lower jaw                232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21454...  T                   Treat lower jaw                232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21461...  T                   Repair lower jaw               232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21462...  T                   Repair lower jaw               232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21465...  T                   Repair lower jaw               232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
                               fracture.
21470...  C                   Repair lower jaw         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21480...  T                   Reset dislocated jaw...        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21485...  T                   Reset dislocated jaw...        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21490...  T                   Repair dislocated jaw..        232      23.93  $1,265.45      $639.35      $253.09
21493...  T                   Treat hyoid bone               231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21494...  T                   Repair hyoid bone              231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
                               fracture.
21495...  C                   Repair hyoid bone        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
21497...  T                   Interdental wiring.....        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21499...  T                   Head surgery procedure.        231      12.02    $635.66      $299.90      $127.13
21501...  T                   Drain neck/chest lesion        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
21502...  T                   Drain chest lesion.....        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
21510...  C                   Drainage of bone lesion  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21550...  T                   Biopsy of neck/chest...        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
21555...  T                   Remove lesion neck/            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               chest.
21556...  T                   Remove lesion neck/            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               chest.
21557...  C                   Remove tumor, neck or    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               chest.
21600...  T                   Partial removal of rib.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
21610...  T                   Partial removal of rib.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
21615...  C                   Removal of rib.........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21616...  C                   Removal of rib and       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               nerves.
21620...  C                   Partial removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               sternum.
21627...  C                   Sternal debridement....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21630...  C                   Extensive sternum        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
21632...  C                   Extensive sternum        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
21700...  T                   Revision of neck muscle        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
21705...  C                   Revision of neck muscle/ .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               rib.
21720...  T                   Revision of neck muscle        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
21725...  T                   Revision of neck muscle        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
21740...  C                   Reconstruction of        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               sternum.
21750...  C                   Repair of sternum        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               separation.
21800...  T                   Treatment of rib               207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
21805...  T                   Treatment of rib               216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
21810...  C                   Treatment of rib         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture(s).
21820...  T                   Treat sternum fracture.        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
21825...  C                   Repair sternum fracture  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
21899...  T                   Neck/chest surgery             207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               procedure.
21920...  T                   Biopsy soft tissue of          161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               back.
21925...  T                   Biopsy soft tissue of          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               back.
21930...  T                   Remove lesion, back or         163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               flank.
21935...  T                   Remove tumor of back...        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
22100...  C                   Remove part of neck      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
22101...  C                   Remove part, thorax      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
22102...  C                   Remove part, lumbar      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
22103...  C                   Remove extra spine       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22110...  C                   Remove part of neck      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
22112...  C                   Remove part, thorax      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
22114...  C                   Remove part, lumbar      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               vertebra.
22116...  C                   Remove extra spine       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22210...  C                   Revision of neck spine.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22212...  C                   Revision of thorax       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               spine.
22214...  C                   Revision of lumbar       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               spine.
22216...  C                   Revise, extra spine      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22220...  C                   Revision of neck spine.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22222...  C                   Revision of thorax       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               spine.
22224...  C                   Revision of lumbar       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               spine.
22226...  C                   Revise, extra spine      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22305...  T                   Treat spine process            207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
22310...  T                   Treat spine fracture...        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
22315...  T                   Treat spine fracture...        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
22325...  C                   Repair of spine          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
22326...  C                   Repair neck spine        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
22327...  C                   Repair thorax spine      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.

[[Page 47633]]


22328...  C                   Repair each add spine    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fx.
22505...  T                   Manipulation of spine..        210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
22548...  C                   Neck spine fusion......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22554...  C                   Neck spine fusion......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22556...  C                   Thorax spine fusion....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22558...  C                   Lumbar spine fusion....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22585...  C                   Additional spinal        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fusion.
22590...  C                   Spine & skull spinal     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fusion.
22595...  C                   Neck spinal fusion.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22600...  C                   Neck spine fusion......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22610...  C                   Thorax spine fusion....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22612...  C                   Lumbar spine fusion....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22614...  C                   Spine fusion, extra      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22630...  C                   Lumbar spine fusion....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22632...  C                   Spine fusion, extra      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22800...  C                   Fusion of spine........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22802...  C                   Fusion of spine........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22804...  C                   Fusion of spine........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22808...  C                   Fusion of spine........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22810...  C                   Fusion of spine........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22812...  C                   Fusion of spine........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
22818...  C                   Kyphectomy, 1-2          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segments.
22819...  C                   Kyphectomy, 3 & more     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               segment.
22830...  C                   Exploration of spinal    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fusion.
22840...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22841...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22842...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22843...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22844...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22845...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22846...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22847...  C                   Insert spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22848...  C                   Insert pelvic fixation   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22849...  C                   Reinsert spinal          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fixation.
22850...  C                   Remove spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22851...  C                   Apply spine prosth       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22852...  C                   Remove spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22855...  C                   Remove spine fixation    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               device.
22899...  T                   Spine surgery procedure        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
22900...  T                   Remove abdominal wall          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
22999...  T                   Abdomen surgery                163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               procedure.
23000...  T                   Removal of calcium             162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               deposits.
23020...  T                   Release shoulder joint.        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
23030...  T                   Drain shoulder lesion..        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
23031...  T                   Drain shoulder bursa...        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
23035...  C                   Drain shoulderbone       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lesion.
23040...  T                   Exploratory shoulder           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               surgery.
23044...  T                   Exploratory shoulder           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               surgery.
23065...  T                   Biopsy shoulder tissues        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
23066...  T                   Biopsy shoulder tissues        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
23075...  T                   Removal of shoulder            162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               lesion.
23076...  T                   Removal of shoulder            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
23077...  T                   Remove tumor of                163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               shoulder.
23100...  T                   Biopsy of shoulder             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               joint.
23101...  T                   Shoulder joint surgery.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
23105...  T                   Remove shoulder joint          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
23106...  T                   Incision of collarbone         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
23107...  T                   Explore, treat shoulder        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
23120...  T                   Partial removal,               253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               collarbone.
23125...  C                   Removal of collarbone..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
23130...  T                   Partial removal,               253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               shoulderbone.
23140...  T                   Removal of bone lesion.        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
23145...  T                   Removal of bone lesion.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
23146...  T                   Removal of bone lesion.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
23150...  T                   Removal of humerus             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23155...  T                   Removal of humerus             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23156...  T                   Removal of humerus             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23170...  T                   Remove collarbone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23172...  T                   Remove shoulder blade          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23174...  T                   Remove humerus lesion..        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
23180...  T                   Remove collarbone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23182...  T                   Remove shoulderblade           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
23184...  T                   Remove humerus lesion..        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
23190...  T                   Partial removal of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               scapula.
23195...  C                   Removal of head of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               humerus.

[[Page 47634]]


23200...  C                   Removal of collarbone..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
23210...  C                   Removal of               .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulderblade.
23220...  C                   Partial removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               humerus.
23221...  C                   Partial removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               humerus.
23222...  C                   Partial removal of       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               humerus.
23330...  T                   Remove shoulder foreign        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               body.
23331...  T                   Remove shoulder foreign        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               body.
23332...  C                   Remove shoulder foreign  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               body.
23350...  T                   Injection for shoulder         347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               x-ray.
23395...  C                   Muscle transfer,         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulder/arm.
23397...  C                   Muscle transfers.......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
23400...  C                   Fixation of              .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               shoulderblade.
23405...  T                   Incision of tendon &           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
23406...  T                   Incise tendon(s) &             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle(s).
23410...  T                   Repair of tendon(s)....        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23412...  T                   Repair of tendon(s)....        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23415...  T                   Release of shoulder            253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               ligament.
23420...  T                   Repair of shoulder.....        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23430...  T                   Repair biceps tendon...        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23440...  C                   Removal/transplant       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               tendon.
23450...  T                   Repair shoulder capsule        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23455...  T                   Repair shoulder capsule        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23460...  T                   Repair shoulder capsule        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23462...  T                   Repair shoulder capsule        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23465...  T                   Repair shoulder capsule        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23466...  T                   Repair shoulder capsule        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
23470...  C                   Reconstruct shoulder     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               joint.
23472...  C                   Reconstruct shoulder     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               joint.
23480...  T                   Revision of collarbone.        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
23485...  T                   Revision of collarbone.        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
23490...  T                   Reinforce clavicle.....        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
23491...  T                   Reinforce shoulderbones        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
23500...  T                   Treat clavicle fracture        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
23505...  T                   Treat clavicle fracture        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
23515...  T                   Repair clavicle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
23520...  T                   Treat clavicle                 207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
23525...  T                   Treat clavicle                 207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
23530...  T                   Repair clavicle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
23532...  T                   Repair clavicle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
23540...  T                   Treat clavicle                 207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
23545...  T                   Treat clavicle                 207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
23550...  T                   Repair clavicle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
23552...  T                   Repair clavicle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
23570...  T                   Treat shoulderblade            207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
23575...  T                   Treat shoulderblade            207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
23585...  T                   Repair scapula fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
23600...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
23605...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
23615...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
23616...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
23620...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
23625...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
23630...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
23650...  T                   Treat shoulder                 207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
23655...  T                   Treat shoulder                 210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
                               dislocation.
23660...  T                   Repair shoulder                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
23665...  T                   Treat dislocation/             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
23670...  T                   Repair dislocation/            216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
23675...  T                   Treat dislocation/             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
23680...  T                   Repair dislocation/            216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
23700...  T                   Fixation of shoulder...        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
23800...  T                   Fusion of shoulder             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
23802...  T                   Fusion of shoulder             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
23900...  C                   Amputation of arm &      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               girdle.
23920...  C                   Amputation at shoulder   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               joint.
23921...  T                   Amputation follow-up           183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               surgery.
23929...  T                   Shoulder surgery               207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               procedure.
23930...  T                   Drainage of arm lesion.        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
23931...  T                   Drainage of arm bursa..        132       6.04    $319.30      $134.24       $63.86
23935...  T                   Drain arm/elbow bone           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
24000...  T                   Exploratory elbow              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               surgery.
24006...  T                   Release elbow joint....        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24065...  T                   Biopsy arm/elbow soft          161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               tissue.
24066...  T                   Biopsy arm/elbow soft          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               tissue.
24075...  T                   Remove arm/elbow lesion        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94

[[Page 47635]]


24076...  T                   Remove arm/elbow lesion        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
24077...  T                   Remove tumor of arm/           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               elbow.
24100...  T                   Biopsy elbow joint             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lining.
24101...  T                   Explore/treat elbow            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
24102...  T                   Remove elbow joint             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
24105...  T                   Removal of elbow bursa.        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
24110...  T                   Remove humerus lesion..        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
24115...  T                   Remove/graft bone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24116...  T                   Remove/graft bone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24120...  T                   Remove elbow lesion....        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
24125...  T                   Remove/graft bone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24126...  T                   Remove/graft bone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24130...  T                   Removal of head of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               radius.
24134...  T                   Removal of arm bone            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24136...  T                   Remove radius bone             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24138...  T                   Remove elbow bone              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
24140...  T                   Partial removal of arm         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               bone.
24145...  T                   Partial removal of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               radius.
24147...  T                   Partial removal of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               elbow.
24149...  C                   Radical resection of     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               elbow.
24150...  C                   Extensive humerus        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
24151...  C                   Extensive humerus        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
24152...  C                   Extensive radius         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
24153...  C                   Extensive radius         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
24155...  T                   Removal of elbow joint.        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24160...  T                   Remove elbow joint             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               implant.
24164...  T                   Remove radius head             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               implant.
24200...  T                   Removal of arm foreign         161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               body.
24201...  T                   Removal of arm foreign         163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               body.
24220...  T                   Injection for elbow x-         347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               ray.
24301...  T                   Muscle/tendon transfer.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24305...  T                   Arm tendon lengthening.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24310...  T                   Revision of arm tendon.        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
24320...  T                   Repair of arm tendon...        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24330...  T                   Revision of arm muscles        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24331...  T                   Revision of arm muscles        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24340...  T                   Repair of biceps tendon        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24341...  T                   Repair tendon/muscle           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               arm.
24342...  T                   Repair of ruptured             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon.
24350...  T                   Repair of tennis elbow.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24351...  T                   Repair of tennis elbow.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24352...  T                   Repair of tennis elbow.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24354...  T                   Repair of tennis elbow.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24356...  T                   Revision of tennis             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               elbow.
24360...  T                   Reconstruct elbow joint        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
24361...  T                   Reconstruct elbow joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
24362...  T                   Reconstruct elbow joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
24363...  T                   Replace elbow joint....        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
24365...  T                   Reconstruct head of            217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
                               radius.
24366...  T                   Reconstruct head of            218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
                               radius.
24400...  T                   Revision of humerus....        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24410...  T                   Revision of humerus....        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
24420...  T                   Revision of humerus....        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24430...  T                   Repair of humerus......        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24435...  T                   Repair humerus with            253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               graft.
24470...  T                   Revision of elbow joint        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24495...  T                   Decompression of               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               forearm.
24498...  T                   Reinforce humerus......        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24500...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24505...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24515...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24516...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24530...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24535...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24538...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24545...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24546...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24560...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24565...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24566...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24575...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24576...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24577...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24579...  T                   Repair humerus fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24582...  T                   Treat humerus fracture.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93

[[Page 47636]]


24586...  T                   Repair elbow fracture..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24587...  T                   Repair elbow fracture..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24600...  T                   Treat elbow dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24605...  T                   Treat elbow dislocation        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
24615...  T                   Repair elbow                   216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
24620...  T                   Treat elbow fracture...        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24635...  T                   Repair elbow fracture..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24640...  T                   Treat elbow dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24650...  T                   Treat radius fracture..        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24655...  T                   Treat radius fracture..        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
24665...  T                   Repair radius fracture.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24666...  T                   Repair radius fracture.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24670...  T                   Treatment of ulna              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
24675...  T                   Treatment of ulna              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
24685...  T                   Repair ulna fracture...        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
24800...  T                   Fusion of elbow joint..        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
24802...  T                   Fusion/graft of elbow          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
24900...  C                   Amputation of upper arm  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
24920...  C                   Amputation of upper arm  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
24925...  T                   Amputation follow-up           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               surgery.
24930...  C                   Amputation follow-up     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
24931...  C                   Amputate upper arm &     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               implant.
24935...  C                   Revision of amputation.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
24940...  C                   Revision of upper arm..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
24999...  T                   Upper arm/elbow surgery        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25000...  T                   Incision of tendon             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               sheath.
25020...  T                   Decompression of               251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               forearm.
25023...  T                   Decompression of               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               forearm.
25028...  T                   Drainage of forearm            251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
25031...  T                   Drainage of forearm            251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               bursa.
25035...  T                   Treat forearm bone             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
25040...  T                   Explore/treat wrist            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
25065...  T                   Biopsy forearm soft            161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               tissues.
25066...  T                   Biopsy forearm soft            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               tissues.
25075...  T                   Removal of forearm             162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               lesion.
25076...  T                   Removal of forearm             163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
25077...  T                   Remove tumor, forearm/         163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               wrist.
25085...  T                   Incision of wrist              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               capsule.
25100...  T                   Biopsy of wrist joint..        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
25101...  T                   Explore/treat wrist            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
25105...  T                   Remove wrist joint             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
25107...  T                   Remove wrist joint             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               cartilage.
25110...  T                   Remove wrist tendon            251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
25111...  T                   Remove wrist tendon            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lesion.
25112...  T                   Remove wrist tendon            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lesion.
25115...  T                   Remove wrist/forearm           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
25116...  T                   Remove wrist/forearm           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
25118...  T                   Excise wrist tendon            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               sheath.
25119...  T                   Partial removal of ulna        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25120...  T                   Removal of forearm             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
25125...  T                   Remove/graft forearm           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
25126...  T                   Remove/graft forearm           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
25130...  T                   Removal of wrist lesion        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25135...  T                   Remove & graft wrist           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
25136...  T                   Remove & graft wrist           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
25145...  T                   Remove forearm bone            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
25150...  T                   Partial removal of ulna        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25151...  T                   Partial removal of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               radius.
25170...  C                   Extensive forearm        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
25210...  T                   Removal of wrist bone..        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
25215...  T                   Removal of wrist bones.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
25230...  T                   Partial removal of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               radius.
25240...  T                   Partial removal of ulna        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25246...  T                   Injection for wrist x-         347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               ray.
25248...  T                   Remove forearm foreign         251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               body.
25250...  T                   Removal of wrist               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               prosthesis.
25251...  T                   Removal of wrist               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               prosthesis.
25260...  T                   Repair forearm tendon/         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
25263...  T                   Repair forearm tendon/         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
25265...  T                   Repair forearm tendon/         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
25270...  T                   Repair forearm tendon/         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
25272...  T                   Repair forearm tendon/         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
25274...  T                   Repair forearm tendon/         252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               muscle.
25280...  T                   Revise wrist/forearm           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendon.
25290...  T                   Incise wrist/forearm           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendon.

[[Page 47637]]


25295...  T                   Release wrist/forearm          251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendon.
25300...  T                   Fusion of tendons at           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               wrist.
25301...  T                   Fusion of tendons at           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               wrist.
25310...  T                   Transplant forearm             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon.
25312...  T                   Transplant forearm             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon.
25315...  T                   Revise palsy hand              253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon(s).
25316...  T                   Revise palsy hand              253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon(s).
25320...  T                   Repair/revise wrist            253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
25332...  T                   Revise wrist joint.....        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
25335...  T                   Realignment of hand....        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25337...  T                   Reconstruct ulna/              253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               radioulnar.
25350...  T                   Revision of radius.....        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25355...  T                   Revision of radius.....        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25360...  T                   Revision of ulna.......        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25365...  T                   Revise radius & ulna...        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25370...  T                   Revise radius or ulna..        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25375...  T                   Revise radius & ulna...        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25390...  C                   Shorten radius/ulna....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25391...  C                   Lengthen radius/ulna...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25392...  C                   Shorten radius & ulna..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25393...  C                   Lengthen radius & ulna.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25400...  T                   Repair radius or ulna..        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25405...  C                   Repair/graft radius or   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               ulna.
25415...  T                   Repair radius & ulna...        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
25420...  C                   Repair/graft radius &    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               ulna.
25425...  T                   Repair/graft radius or         253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               ulna.
25426...  T                   Repair/graft radius &          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               ulna.
25440...  T                   Repair/graft wrist bone        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25441...  T                   Reconstruct wrist joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
25442...  T                   Reconstruct wrist joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
25443...  T                   Reconstruct wrist joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
25444...  T                   Reconstruct wrist joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
25445...  T                   Reconstruct wrist joint        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
25446...  T                   Wrist replacement......        218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
25447...  T                   Repair wrist joint(s)..        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
25449...  T                   Remove wrist joint             217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
                               implant.
25450...  T                   Revision of wrist joint        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25455...  T                   Revision of wrist joint        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25490...  T                   Reinforce radius.......        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25491...  T                   Reinforce ulna.........        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25492...  T                   Reinforce radius and           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               ulna.
25500...  T                   Treat fracture of              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               radius.
25505...  T                   Treat fracture of              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               radius.
25515...  T                   Repair fracture of             216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               radius.
25520...  T                   Repair fracture of             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               radius.
25525...  T                   Repair fracture of             216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               radius.
25526...  T                   Repair fracture of             216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               radius.
25530...  T                   Treat fracture of ulna.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25535...  T                   Treat fracture of ulna.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25545...  T                   Repair fracture of ulna        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
25560...  T                   Treat fracture radius &        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               ulna.
25565...  T                   Treat fracture radius &        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               ulna.
25574...  T                   Treat fracture radius &        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               ulna.
25575...  T                   Repair fracture radius/        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               ulna.
25600...  T                   Treat fracture radius/         209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               ulna.
25605...  T                   Treat fracture radius/         209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               ulna.
25611...  T                   Repair fracture radius/        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               ulna.
25620...  T                   Repair fracture radius/        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               ulna.
25622...  T                   Treat wrist bone               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
25624...  T                   Treat wrist bone               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
25628...  T                   Repair wrist bone              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
25630...  T                   Treat wrist bone               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
25635...  T                   Treat wrist bone               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
25645...  T                   Repair wrist bone              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
25650...  T                   Repair wrist bone              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
25660...  T                   Treat wrist dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25670...  T                   Repair wrist                   216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
25675...  T                   Treat wrist dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25676...  T                   Repair wrist                   216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
25680...  T                   Treat wrist fracture...        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25685...  T                   Repair wrist fracture..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
25690...  T                   Treat wrist dislocation        209       1.94     102.84       $37.29       $20.57
25695...  T                   Repair wrist                   216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
25800...  T                   Fusion of wrist joint..        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
25805...  T                   Fusion/graft of wrist          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.

[[Page 47638]]


25810...  T                   Fusion/graft of wrist          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
25820...  T                   Fusion of hand bones...        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
25825...  T                   Fusion hand bones with         262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               graft.
25830...  T                   Fusion radioulnar jnt/         253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               ulna.
25900...  C                   Amputation of forearm..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25905...  C                   Amputation of forearm..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25907...  T                   Amputation follow-up           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               surgery.
25909...  C                   Amputation follow-up     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
25915...  C                   Amputation of forearm..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25920...  C                   Amputate hand at wrist.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25922...  T                   Amputate hand at wrist.        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
25924...  C                   Amputation follow-up     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
25927...  C                   Amputation of hand.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
25929...  T                   Amputation follow-up           183      11.17    $590.61      $286.57      $118.12
                               surgery.
25931...  C                   Amputation follow-up     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
25999...  T                   Forearm or wrist               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               surgery.
26010...  T                   Drainage of finger             131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               abscess.
26011...  T                   Drainage of finger             131       1.94    $102.84       $36.61       $20.57
                               abscess.
26020...  T                   Drain hand tendon              261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               sheath.
26025...  T                   Drainage of palm bursa.        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26030...  T                   Drainage of palm               261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               bursa(s).
26034...  T                   Treat hand bone lesion.        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26035...  T                   Decompress fingers/hand        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26037...  T                   Decompress fingers/hand        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26040...  T                   Release palm                   262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               contracture.
26045...  T                   Release palm                   262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               contracture.
26055...  T                   Incise finger tendon           261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               sheath.
26060...  T                   Incision of finger             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26070...  T                   Explore/treat hand             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               joint.
26075...  T                   Explore/treat finger           261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               joint.
26080...  T                   Explore/treat finger           261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               joint.
26100...  T                   Biopsy hand joint              261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lining.
26105...  T                   Biopsy finger joint            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lining.
26110...  T                   Biopsy finger joint            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lining.
26115...  T                   Removal of hand lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
26116...  T                   Removal of hand lesion.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
26117...  T                   Remove tumor, hand/            163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               finger.
26121...  T                   Release palm                   262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               contracture.
26123...  T                   Release palm                   262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               contracture.
26125...  T                   Release palm                   262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               contracture.
26130...  T                   Remove wrist joint             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lining.
26135...  T                   Revise finger joint,           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               each.
26140...  T                   Revise finger joint,           261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               each.
26145...  T                   Tendon excision, palm/         261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               finger.
26160...  T                   Remove tendon sheath           261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lesion.
26170...  T                   Removal of palm tendon,        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               each.
26180...  T                   Removal of finger              261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26185...  T                   Remove finger bone.....        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26200...  T                   Remove hand bone lesion        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26205...  T                   Remove/graft bone              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               lesion.
26210...  T                   Removal of finger              261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lesion.
26215...  T                   Remove/graft finger            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               lesion.
26230...  T                   Partial removal of hand        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               bone.
26235...  T                   Partial removal, finger        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               bone.
26236...  T                   Partial removal, finger        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               bone.
26250...  T                   Extensive hand surgery.        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26255...  T                   Extensive hand surgery.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26260...  T                   Extensive finger               261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               surgery.
26261...  T                   Extensive finger               261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               surgery.
26262...  T                   Partial removal of             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               finger.
26320...  T                   Removal of implant from        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               hand.
26350...  T                   Repair finger/hand             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26352...  T                   Repair/graft hand              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26356...  T                   Repair finger/hand             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26357...  T                   Repair finger/hand             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26358...  T                   Repair/graft hand              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26370...  T                   Repair finger/hand             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26372...  T                   Repair/graft hand              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26373...  T                   Repair finger/hand             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26390...  T                   Revise hand/finger             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26392...  T                   Repair/graft hand              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26410...  T                   Repair hand tendon.....        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26412...  T                   Repair/graft hand              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26415...  T                   Excision, hand/finger          262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26416...  T                   Graft hand or finger           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.

[[Page 47639]]


26418...  T                   Repair finger tendon...        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26420...  T                   Repair/graft finger            262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26426...  T                   Repair finger/hand             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26428...  T                   Repair/graft finger            262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26432...  T                   Repair finger tendon...        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26433...  T                   Repair finger tendon...        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26434...  T                   Repair/graft finger            262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26437...  T                   Realignment of tendons.        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26440...  T                   Release palm/finger            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26442...  T                   Release palm & finger          262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26445...  T                   Release hand/finger            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26449...  T                   Release forearm/hand           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26450...  T                   Incision of palm tendon        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26455...  T                   Incision of finger             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26460...  T                   Incise hand/finger             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26471...  T                   Fusion of finger               261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendons.
26474...  T                   Fusion of finger               261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendons.
26476...  T                   Tendon lengthening.....        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26477...  T                   Tendon shortening......        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26478...  T                   Lengthening of hand            261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26479...  T                   Shortening of hand             261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               tendon.
26480...  T                   Transplant hand tendon.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26483...  T                   Transplant/graft hand          262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26485...  T                   Transplant palm tendon.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26489...  T                   Transplant/graft palm          262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tendon.
26490...  T                   Revise thumb tendon....        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26492...  T                   Tendon transfer with           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               graft.
26494...  T                   Hand tendon/muscle             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               transfer.
26496...  T                   Revise thumb tendon....        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26497...  T                   Finger tendon transfer.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26498...  T                   Finger tendon transfer.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26499...  T                   Revision of finger.....        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26500...  T                   Hand tendon                    261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               reconstruction.
26502...  T                   Hand tendon                    262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               reconstruction.
26504...  T                   Hand tendon                    262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               reconstruction.
26508...  T                   Release thumb                  261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               contracture.
26510...  T                   Thumb tendon transfer..        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26516...  T                   Fusion of knuckle joint        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26517...  T                   Fusion of knuckle              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               joints.
26518...  T                   Fusion of knuckle              262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               joints.
26520...  T                   Release knuckle                261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               contracture.
26525...  T                   Release finger                 261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               contracture.
26530...  T                   Revise knuckle joint...        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
26531...  T                   Revise knuckle with            218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
                               implant.
26535...  T                   Revise finger joint....        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
26536...  T                   Revise/implant finger          218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
                               joint.
26540...  T                   Repair hand joint......        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26541...  T                   Repair hand joint with         262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               graft.
26542...  T                   Repair hand joint with         261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               graft.
26545...  T                   Reconstruct finger             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               joint.
26546...  T                   Repair non-union hand..        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26548...  T                   Reconstruct finger             262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               joint.
26550...  T                   Construct thumb                262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               replacement.
26551...  C                   Great toe-hand transfer  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
26553...  C                   Single toe-hand          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               transfer.
26554...  C                   Double toe-hand          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               transfer.
26555...  T                   Positional change of           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               finger.
26556...  C                   Toe joint transfer.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
26560...  T                   Repair of web finger...        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26561...  T                   Repair of web finger...        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26562...  T                   Repair of web finger...        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26565...  T                   Correct metacarpal flaw        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26567...  T                   Correct finger                 262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               deformity.
26568...  T                   Lengthen metacarpal/           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               finger.
26580...  T                   Repair hand deformity..        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26585...  T                   Repair finger deformity        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26587...  T                   Reconstruct extra              261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               finger.
26590...  T                   Repair finger deformity        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26591...  T                   Repair muscles of hand.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26593...  T                   Release muscles of hand        261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
26596...  T                   Excision constricting          262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               tissue.
26597...  T                   Release of scar                262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               contracture.
26600...  T                   Treat metacarpal               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
26605...  T                   Treat metacarpal               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
26607...  T                   Treat metacarpal               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.

[[Page 47640]]


26608...  T                   Treat metacarpal               216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
26615...  T                   Repair metacarpal              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
26641...  T                   Treat thumb dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
26645...  T                   Treat thumb fracture...        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
26650...  T                   Repair thumb fracture..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
26665...  T                   Repair thumb fracture..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
26670...  T                   Treat hand dislocation.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
26675...  T                   Treat hand dislocation.        210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
26676...  T                   Pin hand dislocation...        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
26685...  T                   Repair hand dislocation        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
26686...  T                   Repair hand dislocation        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
26700...  T                   Treat knuckle                  207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
26705...  T                   Treat knuckle                  210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
                               dislocation.
26706...  T                   Pin knuckle dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
26715...  T                   Repair knuckle                 216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
26720...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               each.
26725...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               each.
26727...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               each.
26735...  T                   Repair finger fracture,        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               each.
26740...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               each.
26742...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               each.
26746...  T                   Repair finger fracture,        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               each.
26750...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               each.
26755...  T                   Treat finger fracture,         207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               each.
26756...  T                   Pin finger fracture,           216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               each.
26765...  T                   Repair finger fracture,        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               each.
26770...  T                   Treat finger                   207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               dislocation.
26775...  T                   Treat finger                   210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
                               dislocation.
26776...  T                   Pin finger dislocation.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
26785...  T                   Repair finger                  216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
26820...  T                   Thumb fusion with graft        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26841...  T                   Fusion of thumb........        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26842...  T                   Thumb fusion with graft        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26843...  T                   Fusion of hand joint...        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26844...  T                   Fusion/graft of hand           262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               joint.
26850...  T                   Fusion of knuckle......        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26852...  T                   Fusion of knuckle with         262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               graft.
26860...  T                   Fusion of finger joint.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26861...  T                   Fusion of finger joint,        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               added.
26862...  T                   Fusion/graft of finger         262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               joint.
26863...  T                   Fuse/graft added joint.        262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
26910...  T                   Amputate metacarpal            262      18.35    $970.64      $480.93      $194.13
                               bone.
26951...  T                   Amputation of finger/          261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               thumb.
26952...  T                   Amputation of finger/          261      10.54    $557.31      $261.48      $111.46
                               thumb.
26989...  T                   Hand/finger surgery....        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
26990...  T                   Drainage of pelvis             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
26991...  T                   Drainage of pelvis             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               bursa.
26992...  C                   Drainage of bone lesion  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27000...  T                   Incision of hip tendon.        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27001...  T                   Incision of hip tendon.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27003...  T                   Incision of hip tendon.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27005...  C                   Incision of hip tendon.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27006...  C                   Incision of hip tendons  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27025...  C                   Incision of hip/thigh    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fascia.
27030...  C                   Drainage of hip joint..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27033...  T                   Exploration of hip             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
27035...  C                   Denervation of hip       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               joint.
27036...  C                   Excision of hip joint/   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               muscle.
27040...  T                   Biopsy of soft tissues.        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
27041...  T                   Biopsy of soft tissues.        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
27047...  T                   Remove hip/pelvis              163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
27048...  T                   Remove hip/pelvis              163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               lesion.
27049...  T                   Remove tumor, hip/             163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               pelvis.
27050...  T                   Biopsy of sacroiliac           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               joint.
27052...  T                   Biopsy of hip joint....        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27054...  C                   Removal of hip joint     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               lining.
27060...  T                   Removal of ischial             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               bursa.
27062...  T                   Remove femur lesion/           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               bursa.
27065...  T                   Removal of hip bone            251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
27066...  T                   Removal of hip bone            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
27067...  T                   Remove/graft hip bone          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
27070...  C                   Partial removal of hip   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
27071...  C                   Partial removal of hip   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
27075...  C                   Extensive hip surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27076...  C                   Extensive hip surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........

[[Page 47641]]


27077...  C                   Extensive hip surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27078...  C                   Extensive hip surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27079...  C                   Extensive hip surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27080...  T                   Removal of tail bone...        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27086...  T                   Remove hip foreign body        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27087...  T                   Remove hip foreign body        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27090...  C                   Removal of hip           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prosthesis.
27091...  C                   Removal of hip           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prosthesis.
27093...  T                   Injection for hip x-ray        347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
27095...  T                   Injection for hip x-ray        347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
27097...  T                   Revision of hip tendon.        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27098...  T                   Transfer tendon to             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               pelvis.
27100...  T                   Transfer of abdominal          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               muscle.
27105...  T                   Transfer of spinal             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               muscle.
27110...  T                   Transfer of iliopsoas          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               muscle.
27111...  T                   Transfer of iliopsoas          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               muscle.
27120...  C                   Reconstruction of hip    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               socket.
27122...  C                   Reconstruction of hip    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               socket.
27125...  C                   Partial hip replacement  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27130...  C                   Total hip replacement..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27132...  C                   Total hip replacement..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27134...  C                   Revise hip joint         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
27137...  C                   Revise hip joint         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
27138...  C                   Revise hip joint         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replacement.
27140...  C                   Transplant of femur      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               ridge.
27146...  C                   Incision of hip bone...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27147...  C                   Revision of hip bone...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27151...  C                   Incision of hip bones..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27156...  C                   Revision of hip bones..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27158...  C                   Revision of pelvis.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27161...  C                   Incision of neck of      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               femur.
27165...  C                   Incision/fixation of     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               femur.
27170...  C                   Repair/graft femur head/ .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               neck.
27175...  C                   Treat slipped epiphysis  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27176...  C                   Treat slipped epiphysis  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27177...  C                   Repair slipped           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               epiphysis.
27178...  C                   Repair slipped           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               epiphysis.
27179...  C                   Revise head/neck of      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               femur.
27181...  C                   Repair slipped           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               epiphysis.
27185...  C                   Revision of femur        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               epiphysis.
27187...  C                   Reinforce hip bones....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27193...  T                   Treat pelvic ring              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27194...  T                   Treat pelvic ring              210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
                               fracture.
27200...  T                   Treat tail bone                207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
27202...  T                   Repair tail bone               216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27215...  C                   Pelvic fracture(s)       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               treatment.
27216...  C                   Treat pelvic ring        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27217...  C                   Treat pelvic ring        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27218...  C                   Treat pelvic ring        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27220...  T                   Treat hip socket               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27222...  C                   Treat hip socket         .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27226...  C                   Treat hip wall fracture  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27227...  C                   Treat hip fracture(s)..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27228...  C                   Treat hip fracture(s)..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27230...  T                   Treat fracture of thigh        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27232...  C                   Treat fracture of thigh  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27235...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27236...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27238...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27240...  C                   Treatment of thigh       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27244...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27245...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27246...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27248...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27250...  T                   Treat hip dislocation..        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27252...  T                   Treat hip dislocation..        210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
27253...  C                   Repair of hip            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               dislocation.
27254...  C                   Repair of hip            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               dislocation.
27256...  T                   Treatment of hip               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               dislocation.
27257...  T                   Treatment of hip               210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
                               dislocation.
27258...  C                   Repair of hip            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               dislocation.
27259...  C                   Repair of hip            .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               dislocation.
27265...  T                   Treatment of hip               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               dislocation.
27266...  T                   Treatment of hip               217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
                               dislocation.
27275...  T                   Manipulation of hip            210      10.46    $553.39       $283.4      $110.68
                               joint.

[[Page 47642]]


27280...  C                   Fusion of sacroiliac     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               joint.
27282...  C                   Fusion of pubic bones..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27284...  C                   Fusion of hip joint....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27286...  C                   Fusion of hip joint....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27290...  C                   Amputation of leg at     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hip.
27295...  C                   Amputation of leg at     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               hip.
27299...  T                   Pelvis/hip joint               207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               surgery.
27301...  T                   Drain thigh/knee lesion        132       6.04     $319.3      $134.24       $63.86
27303...  C                   Drainage of bone lesion  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27305...  T                   Incise thigh tendon &          251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               fascia.
27306...  T                   Incision of thigh              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendon.
27307...  T                   Incision of thigh              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendons.
27310...  T                   Exploration of knee            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
27315...  T                   Partial removal, thigh         631      12.98     $686.6       $333.8      $137.32
                               nerve.
27320...  T                   Partial removal, thigh         631      12.98     $686.6       $333.8      $137.32
                               nerve.
27323...  T                   Biopsy thigh soft              162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
                               tissues.
27324...  T                   Biopsy thigh soft              163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               tissues.
27327...  T                   Removal of thigh lesion        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
27328...  T                   Removal of thigh lesion        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
27329...  T                   Remove tumor, thigh/           163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               knee.
27330...  T                   Biopsy knee joint              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
27331...  T                   Explore/treat knee             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
27332...  T                   Removal of knee                252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               cartilage.
27333...  T                   Removal of knee                252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               cartilage.
27334...  T                   Remove knee joint              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
27335...  T                   Remove knee joint              252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
27340...  T                   Removal of kneecap             251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               bursa.
27345...  T                   Removal of knee cyst...        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27350...  T                   Removal of kneecap.....        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27355...  T                   Remove femur lesion....        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27356...  T                   Remove femur lesion/           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               graft.
27357...  T                   Remove femur lesion/           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               graft.
27358...  T                   Remove femur lesion/           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               fixation.
27360...  T                   Partial removal leg            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               bone(s).
27365...  C                   Extensive leg surgery..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27370...  T                   Injection for knee x-          347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               ray.
27372...  T                   Removal of foreign body        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
27380...  T                   Repair of kneecap              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendon.
27381...  T                   Repair/graft kneecap           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendon.
27385...  T                   Repair of thigh muscle.        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27386...  T                   Repair/graft of thigh          251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               muscle.
27390...  T                   Incision of thigh              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendon.
27391...  T                   Incision of thigh              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendons.
27392...  T                   Incision of thigh              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendons.
27393...  T                   Lengthening of thigh           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendon.
27394...  T                   Lengthening of thigh           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendons.
27395...  T                   Lengthening of thigh           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendons.
27396...  T                   Transplant of thigh            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendon.
27397...  T                   Transplants of thigh           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendons.
27400...  T                   Revise thigh muscles/          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendons.
27403...  T                   Repair of knee                 252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               cartilage.
27405...  T                   Repair of knee ligament        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27407...  T                   Repair of knee ligament        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27409...  T                   Repair of knee                 253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               ligaments.
27418...  T                   Repair degenerated             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               kneecap.
27420...  T                   Revision of unstable           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               kneecap.
27422...  T                   Revision of unstable           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               kneecap.
27424...  T                   Revision/removal of            253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               kneecap.
27425...  T                   Lateral retinacular            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               release.
27427...  T                   Reconstruction, knee...        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
27428...  T                   Reconstruction, knee...        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
27429...  T                   Reconstruction, knee...        254      34.37  $1,817.86      $937.22      $363.57
27430...  T                   Revision of thigh              253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               muscles.
27435...  T                   Incision of knee joint.        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27437...  T                   Revise kneecap.........        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
27438...  T                   Revise kneecap with            218      27.50  $1,454.49      $715.52      $290.90
                               implant.
27440...  T                   Revision of knee joint.        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
27441...  T                   Revision of knee joint.        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
27442...  T                   Revision of knee joint.        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
27443...  T                   Revision of knee joint.        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
27445...  C                   Revision of knee joint.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27446...  C                   Revision of knee joint.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27447...  C                   Total knee replacement.  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27448...  C                   Incision of thigh......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27450...  C                   Incision of thigh......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........

[[Page 47643]]


27454...  C                   Realignment of thigh     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
27455...  C                   Realignment of knee....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27457...  C                   Realignment of knee....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27465...  C                   Shortening of thigh      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
27466...  C                   Lengthening of thigh     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               bone.
27468...  C                   Shorten/lengthen thighs  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27470...  C                   Repair of thigh........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27472...  C                   Repair/graft of thigh..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27475...  C                   Surgery to stop leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               growth.
27477...  C                   Surgery to stop leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               growth.
27479...  C                   Surgery to stop leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               growth.
27485...  C                   Surgery to stop leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               growth.
27486...  C                   Revise knee joint        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replace.
27487...  C                   Revise knee joint        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               replace.
27488...  C                   Removal of knee          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               prosthesis.
27495...  C                   Reinforce thigh........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27496...  T                   Decompression of thigh/        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               knee.
27497...  T                   Decompression of thigh/        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               knee.
27498...  T                   Decompression of thigh/        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               knee.
27499...  T                   Decompression of thigh/        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               knee.
27500...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27501...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27502...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27503...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27506...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27507...  C                   Treatment of thigh       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27508...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27509...  T                   Treatment of thigh             216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27510...  T                   Treatment of thigh             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27511...  C                   Treatment of thigh       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27513...  C                   Treatment of thigh       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27514...  C                   Repair of thigh          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27516...  T                   Repair of thigh growth         209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               plate.
27517...  T                   Repair of thigh growth         209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               plate.
27519...  C                   Repair of thigh growth   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               plate.
27520...  T                   Treat kneecap fracture.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27524...  C                   Repair of kneecap        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27530...  T                   Treatment of knee              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27532...  T                   Treatment of knee              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27535...  C                   Treatment of knee        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               fracture.
27536...  C                   Repair of knee fracture  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27538...  T                   Treat knee fracture(s).        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27540...  C                   Repair of knee fracture  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27550...  T                   Treat knee dislocation.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27552...  T                   Treat knee dislocation.        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
27556...  T                   Repair of knee                 216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
27557...  C                   Repair of knee           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               dislocation.
27558...  C                   Repair of knee           .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               dislocation.
27560...  T                   Treat kneecap                  209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               dislocation.
27562...  T                   Treat kneecap                  210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
                               dislocation.
27566...  T                   Repair kneecap                 216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
27570...  T                   Fixation of knee joint.        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
27580...  C                   Fusion of knee.........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27590...  C                   Amputate leg at thigh..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27591...  C                   Amputate leg at thigh..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27592...  C                   Amputate leg at thigh..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27594...  T                   Amputation follow-up           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               surgery.
27596...  C                   Amputation follow-up     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
27598...  C                   Amputate lower leg at    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               knee.
27599...  T                   Leg surgery procedure..        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27600...  T                   Decompression of lower         251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               leg.
27601...  T                   Decompression of lower         251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               leg.
27602...  T                   Decompression of lower         251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               leg.
27603...  T                   Drain lower leg lesion.        132       6.04     $319.3      $134.24       $63.86
27604...  T                   Drain lower leg bursa..        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27605...  T                   Incision of achilles           271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               tendon.
27606...  T                   Incision of achilles           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendon.
27607...  T                   Treat lower leg bone           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
27610...  T                   Explore/treat ankle            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
27612...  T                   Exploration of ankle           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
27613...  T                   Biopsy lower leg soft          161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               tissue.
27614...  T                   Biopsy lower leg soft          163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               tissue.
27615...  T                   Remove tumor, lower leg        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
27618...  T                   Remove lower leg lesion        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
27619...  T                   Remove lower leg lesion        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03

[[Page 47644]]


27620...  T                   Explore, treat ankle           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               joint.
27625...  T                   Remove ankle joint             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
27626...  T                   Remove ankle joint             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lining.
27630...  T                   Removal of tendon              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               lesion.
27635...  T                   Remove lower leg bone          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
27637...  T                   Remove/graft leg bone          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
27638...  T                   Remove/graft leg bone          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               lesion.
27640...  T                   Partial removal of             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tibia.
27641...  T                   Partial removal of             252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               fibula.
27645...  C                   Extensive lower leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
27646...  C                   Extensive lower leg      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
27647...  T                   Extensive ankle/heel           253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               surgery.
27648...  T                   Injection for ankle x-         347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               ray.
27650...  T                   Repair achilles tendon.        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27652...  T                   Repair/graft achilles          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon.
27654...  T                   Repair of achilles             253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon.
27656...  T                   Repair leg fascia              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               defect.
27658...  T                   Repair of leg tendon,          251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               each.
27659...  T                   Repair of leg tendon,          251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               each.
27664...  T                   Repair of leg tendon,          251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               each.
27665...  T                   Repair of leg tendon,          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               each.
27675...  T                   Repair lower leg               251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               tendons.
27676...  T                   Repair lower leg               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendons.
27680...  T                   Release of lower leg           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendon.
27681...  T                   Release of lower leg           252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendons.
27685...  T                   Revision of lower leg          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendon.
27686...  T                   Revise lower leg               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               tendons.
27687...  T                   Revision of calf tendon        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27690...  T                   Revise lower leg tendon        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27691...  T                   Revise lower leg tendon        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27692...  T                   Revise additional leg          253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               tendon.
27695...  T                   Repair of ankle                252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               ligament.
27696...  T                   Repair of ankle                252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               ligaments.
27698...  T                   Repair of ankle                252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               ligament.
27700...  T                   Revision of ankle joint        217      20.48  $1,083.27      $526.81      $216.65
27702...  C                   Reconstruct ankle joint  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27703...  C                   Reconstruction, ankle    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               joint.
27704...  T                   Removal of ankle               251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               implant.
27705...  T                   Incision of tibia......        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27707...  T                   Incision of fibula.....        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27709...  T                   Incision of tibia &            252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               fibula.
27712...  C                   Realignment of lower     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               leg.
27715...  C                   Revision of lower leg..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27720...  C                   Repair of tibia........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27722...  C                   Repair/graft of tibia..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27724...  C                   Repair/graft of tibia..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27725...  C                   Repair of lower leg....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27727...  C                   Repair of lower leg....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27730...  T                   Repair of tibia                252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               epiphysis.
27732...  T                   Repair of fibula               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               epiphysis.
27734...  T                   Repair lower leg               252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               epiphyses.
27740...  T                   Repair of leg epiphyses        252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
27742...  T                   Repair of leg epiphyses        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27745...  T                   Reinforce tibia........        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27750...  T                   Treatment of tibia             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27752...  T                   Treatment of tibia             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27756...  T                   Repair of tibia                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27758...  T                   Repair of tibia                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27759...  T                   Repair of tibia                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27760...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27762...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27766...  T                   Repair of ankle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27780...  T                   Treatment of fibula            209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27781...  T                   Treatment of fibula            209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27784...  T                   Repair of fibula               216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27786...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27788...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27792...  T                   Repair of ankle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27808...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27810...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27814...  T                   Repair of ankle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27816...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27818...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27822...  T                   Repair of ankle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27823...  T                   Repair of ankle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.

[[Page 47645]]


27824...  T                   Treat lower leg                209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27825...  T                   Treat lower leg                209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
27826...  T                   Treat lower leg                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27827...  T                   Treat lower leg                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27828...  T                   Treat lower leg                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
27829...  T                   Treat lower leg joint..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
27830...  T                   Treat lower leg                209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               dislocation.
27831...  T                   Treat lower leg                210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
                               dislocation.
27832...  T                   Repair lower leg               216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
27840...  T                   Treat ankle dislocation        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
27842...  T                   Treat ankle dislocation        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
27846...  T                   Repair ankle                   216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
27848...  T                   Repair ankle                   216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
27860...  T                   Fixation of ankle joint        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
27870...  T                   Fusion of ankle joint..        253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
27871...  T                   Fusion of tibiofibular         253      26.33  $1,392.78      $699.24      $278.56
                               joint.
27880...  C                   Amputation of lower leg  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27881...  C                   Amputation of lower leg  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27882...  C                   Amputation of lower leg  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
27884...  T                   Amputation follow-up           251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               surgery.
27886...  C                   Amputation follow-up     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               surgery.
27888...  C                   Amputation of foot at    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               ankle.
27889...  T                   Amputation of foot at          252      19.39  $1,025.49      $509.18      $205.10
                               ankle.
27892...  T                   Decompression of leg...        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27893...  T                   Decompression of leg...        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27894...  T                   Decompression of leg...        251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
27899...  T                   Leg/ankle surgery              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               procedure.
28001...  T                   Drainage of bursa of           132       6.04     $319.3      $134.24       $63.86
                               foot.
28002...  T                   Treatment of foot              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               infection.
28003...  T                   Treatment of foot              251      14.26    $754.18      $366.12      $150.84
                               infection.
28005...  T                   Treat foot bone lesion.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28008...  T                   Incision of foot fascia        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28010...  T                   Incision of toe tendon.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28011...  T                   Incision of toe tendons        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28020...  T                   Exploration of a foot          271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               joint.
28022...  T                   Exploration of a foot          271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               joint.
28024...  T                   Exploration of a toe           271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               joint.
28030...  T                   Removal of foot nerve..        631      12.98    $686.60      $333.80      $137.32
28035...  T                   Decompression of tibia         631      12.98    $686.60      $333.80      $137.32
                               nerve.
28043...  T                   Excision of foot lesion        162       5.67    $299.71      $125.43       $59.94
28045...  T                   Excision of foot lesion        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28046...  T                   Resection of tumor,            271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               foot.
28050...  T                   Biopsy of foot joint           271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               lining.
28052...  T                   Biopsy of foot joint           271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               lining.
28054...  T                   Biopsy of toe joint            271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               lining.
28060...  T                   Partial removal foot           272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               fascia.
28062...  T                   Removal of foot fascia.        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28070...  T                   Removal of foot joint          272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               lining.
28072...  T                   Removal of foot joint          272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               lining.
28080...  T                   Removal of foot lesion.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28086...  T                   Excise foot tendon             271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               sheath.
28088...  T                   Excise foot tendon             271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               sheath.
28090...  T                   Removal of foot lesion.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28092...  T                   Removal of toe lesions.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28100...  T                   Removal of ankle/heel          271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               lesion.
28102...  T                   Remove/graft foot              272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               lesion.
28103...  T                   Remove/graft foot              272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               lesion.
28104...  T                   Removal of foot lesion.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28106...  T                   Remove/graft foot              272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               lesion.
28107...  T                   Remove/graft foot              272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               lesion.
28108...  T                   Removal of toe lesions.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28110...  T                   Part removal of                276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
                               metatarsal.
28111...  T                   Part removal of                271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               metatarsal.
28112...  T                   Part removal of                271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               metatarsal.
28113...  T                   Part removal of                271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               metatarsal.
28114...  T                   Removal of metatarsal          271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               heads.
28116...  T                   Revision of foot.......        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28118...  T                   Removal of heel bone...        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28119...  T                   Removal of heel spur...        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28120...  T                   Part removal of ankle/         271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               heel.
28122...  T                   Partial removal of foot        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               bone.
28124...  T                   Partial removal of toe.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28126...  T                   Partial removal of toe.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28130...  T                   Removal of ankle bone..        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28140...  T                   Removal of metatarsal..        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40

[[Page 47646]]


28150...  T                   Removal of toe.........        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28153...  T                   Partial removal of toe.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28160...  T                   Partial removal of toe.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28171...  T                   Extensive foot surgery.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28173...  T                   Extensive foot surgery.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28175...  T                   Extensive foot surgery.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28190...  T                   Removal of foot foreign        161       3.50    $185.12       $75.48       $37.02
                               body.
28192...  T                   Removal of foot foreign        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               body.
28193...  T                   Removal of foot foreign        163      10.69    $565.14      $264.65      $113.03
                               body.
28200...  T                   Repair of foot tendon..        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28202...  T                   Repair/graft of foot           272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               tendon.
28208...  T                   Repair of foot tendon..        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28210...  T                   Repair/graft of foot           271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               tendon.
28220...  T                   Release of foot tendon.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28222...  T                   Release of foot tendons        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28225...  T                   Release of foot tendon.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28226...  T                   Release of foot tendons        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28230...  T                   Incision of foot               271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               tendon(s).
28232...  T                   Incision of toe tendon.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28234...  T                   Incision of foot tendon        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28238...  T                   Revision of foot tendon        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28240...  T                   Release of big toe.....        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28250...  T                   Revision of foot fascia        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28260...  T                   Release of midfoot             272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               joint.
28261...  T                   Revision of foot tendon        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28262...  T                   Revision of foot and           272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               ankle.
28264...  T                   Release of midfoot             272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               joint.
28270...  T                   Release of foot                271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               contracture.
28272...  T                   Release of toe joint,          271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               each.
28280...  T                   Fusion of toes.........        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28285...  T                   Repair of hammertoe....        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28286...  T                   Repair of hammertoe....        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28288...  T                   Partial removal of foot        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               bone.
28290...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28292...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28293...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28294...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28296...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28297...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28298...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28299...  T                   Correction of bunion...        276      19.19  $1,014.71      $500.14      $202.94
28300...  T                   Incision of heel bone..        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28302...  T                   Incision of ankle bone.        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28304...  T                   Incision of midfoot            272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               bones.
28305...  T                   Incise/graft midfoot           272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
                               bones.
28306...  T                   Incision of metatarsal.        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28307...  T                   Incision of metatarsal.        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28308...  T                   Incision of metatarsal.        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28309...  T                   Incision of metatarsals        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28310...  T                   Revision of big toe....        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28312...  T                   Revision of toe........        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28313...  T                   Repair deformity of toe        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28315...  T                   Removal of sesamoid            271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               bone.
28320...  T                   Repair of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28322...  T                   Repair of metatarsals..        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28340...  T                   Resect enlarged toe            271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               tissue.
28341...  T                   Resect enlarged toe....        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28344...  T                   Repair extra toe(s)....        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28345...  T                   Repair webbed toe(s)...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28360...  T                   Reconstruct cleft foot.        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28400...  T                   Treatment of heel              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
28405...  T                   Treatment of heel              209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
28406...  T                   Treatment of heel              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28415...  T                   Repair of heel fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28420...  T                   Repair/graft heel              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28430...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
28435...  T                   Treatment of ankle             209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
28436...  T                   Treatment of ankle             216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28445...  T                   Repair of ankle                216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28450...  T                   Treat midfoot fracture,        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               each.
28455...  T                   Treat midfoot fracture,        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               each.
28456...  T                   Repair midfoot fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28465...  T                   Repair midfoot                 216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture, each.
28470...  T                   Treat metatarsal               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
28475...  T                   Treat metatarsal               209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.

[[Page 47647]]


28476...  T                   Repair metatarsal              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28485...  T                   Repair metatarsal              216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28490...  T                   Treat big toe fracture.        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
28495...  T                   Treat big toe fracture.        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
28496...  T                   Repair big toe fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28505...  T                   Repair big toe fracture        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28510...  T                   Treatment of toe               207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
28515...  T                   Treatment of toe               207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               fracture.
28525...  T                   Repair of toe fracture.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28530...  T                   Treat sesamoid bone            209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
                               fracture.
28531...  T                   Treat sesamoid bone            216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               fracture.
28540...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
28545...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
28546...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28555...  T                   Repair foot dislocation        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28570...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
28575...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
28576...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28585...  T                   Repair foot dislocation        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28600...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        209       1.94    $102.84       $37.29       $20.57
28605...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
28606...  T                   Treat foot dislocation.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28615...  T                   Repair foot dislocation        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28630...  T                   Treat toe dislocation..        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
28635...  T                   Treat toe dislocation..        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
28636...  T                   Treat toe dislocation..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28645...  T                   Repair toe dislocation.        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28660...  T                   Treat toe dislocation..        207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
28665...  T                   Treat toe dislocation..        210      10.46    $553.39      $283.40      $110.68
28666...  T                   Treat toe dislocation..        216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
28675...  T                   Repair of toe                  216      20.13  $1,064.67      $520.93      $212.93
                               dislocation.
28705...  T                   Fusion of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28715...  T                   Fusion of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28725...  T                   Fusion of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28730...  T                   Fusion of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28735...  T                   Fusion of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28737...  T                   Revision of foot bones.        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28740...  T                   Fusion of foot bones...        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28750...  T                   Fusion of big toe joint        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28755...  T                   Fusion of big toe joint        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28760...  T                   Fusion of big toe joint        272      16.56    $875.63      $409.74      $175.13
28800...  C                   Amputation of midfoot..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
28805...  C                   Amputation thru          .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               metatarsal.
28810...  T                   Amputation toe &               271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               metatarsal.
28820...  T                   Amputation of toe......        271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
28825...  T                   Partial amputation of          271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               toe.
28899...  T                   Foot/toes surgery              207       1.70     $90.11       $31.64       $18.02
                               procedure.
29000...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29010...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29015...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29020...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29025...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29035...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29040...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29044...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29046...  N                   Application of body      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29049...  N                   Application of figure    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               eight.
29055...  N                   Application of shoulder  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29058...  N                   Application of shoulder  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29065...  N                   Application of long arm  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29075...  N                   Application of forearm   .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29085...  N                   Apply hand/wrist cast..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29105...  N                   Apply long arm splint..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29125...  N                   Apply forearm splint...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29126...  N                   Apply forearm splint...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29130...  N                   Application of finger    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               splint.
29131...  N                   Application of finger    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               splint.
29200...  N                   Strapping of chest.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29220...  N                   Strapping of low back..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29240...  N                   Strapping of shoulder..  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29260...  N                   Strapping of elbow or    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               wrist.
29280...  N                   Strapping of hand or     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               finger.
29305...  N                   Application of hip cast  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29325...  N                   Application of hip       .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               casts.
29345...  N                   Application of long leg  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.

[[Page 47648]]


29355...  N                   Application of long leg  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29358...  N                   Apply long leg cast      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               brace.
29365...  N                   Application of long leg  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29405...  N                   Apply short leg cast...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29425...  N                   Apply short leg cast...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29435...  N                   Apply short leg cast...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29440...  N                   Addition of walker to    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29445...  N                   Apply rigid leg cast...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29450...  N                   Application of leg cast  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29505...  N                   Application long leg     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               splint.
29515...  N                   Application lower leg    .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               splint.
29520...  N                   Strapping of hip.......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29530...  N                   Strapping of knee......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29540...  N                   Strapping of ankle.....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29550...  N                   Strapping of toes......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29580...  N                   Application of paste     .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               boot.
29590...  N                   Application of foot      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               splint.
29700...  N                   Removal/revision of      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29705...  N                   Removal/revision of      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29710...  N                   Removal/revision of      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29715...  N                   Removal/revision of      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29720...  N                   Repair of body cast....  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29730...  N                   Windowing of cast......  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29740...  N                   Wedging of cast........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
29750...  N                   Wedging of clubfoot      .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               cast.
29799...  N                   Casting/strapping        .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
                               procedure.
29800...  T                   Jaw arthroscopy/surgery        280      22.20  $1,174.36      $581.72      $234.87
29804...  T                   Jaw arthroscopy/surgery        281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
29815...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy...        280      22.20  $1,174.36      $581.72      $234.87
29819...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29820...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29821...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29822...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29823...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29825...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29826...  T                   Shoulder arthroscopy/          281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29830...  T                   Elbow arthroscopy......        280      22.20  $1,174.36      $581.72      $234.87
29834...  T                   Elbow arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29835...  T                   Elbow arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29836...  T                   Elbow arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29837...  T                   Elbow arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29838...  T                   Elbow arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29840...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy......        280      22.20  $1,174.36      $581.72      $234.87
29843...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29844...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29845...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29846...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29847...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29848...  T                   Wrist arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29850...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29851...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29855...  T                   Tibial arthroscopy/            286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29856...  T                   Tibial arthroscopy/            286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29860...  T                   Hip arthroscopy, dx....        281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
29861...  T                   Hip arthroscopy/surgery        281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
29862...  T                   Hip arthroscopy/surgery        281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
29863...  T                   Hip arthroscopy/surgery        281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
29870...  T                   Knee arthroscopy,              280      22.20  $1,174.36      $581.72      $234.87
                               diagnostic.
29871...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               drainage.
29874...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29875...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29876...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               surgery.
29877...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29879...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29880...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29881...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29882...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               surgery.
29883...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               surgery.
29884...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29885...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               surgery.
29886...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29887...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               surgery.
29888...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29889...  T                   Knee arthroscopy/              286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29891...  T                   Ankle arthroscopy/             282      23.94  $1,266.43      $614.04      $253.29
                               surgery.

[[Page 47649]]


29892...  T                   Ankle arthroscopy/             286      26.76  $1,415.31      $802.53      $283.06
                               surgery.
29893...  T                   Scope, plantar                 271      14.41    $762.01      $368.38      $152.40
                               fasciotomy.
29894...  T                   Ankle arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29895...  T                   Ankle arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29897...  T                   Ankle arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29898...  T                   Ankle arthroscopy/             281      22.65  $1,197.87      $590.31      $239.57
                               surgery.
29909...  T                   Arthroscopy of joint...        280      22.20  $1,174.36      $581.72      $234.87
30000...  T                   Drainage of nose lesion        311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
30020...  T                   Drainage of nose lesion        311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
30100...  T                   Intranasal biopsy......        311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
30110...  T                   Removal of nose                311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               polyp(s).
30115...  T                   Removal of nose                313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               polyp(s).
30117...  T                   Removal of intranasal          311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               lesion.
30118...  T                   Removal of intranasal          313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               lesion.
30120...  T                   Revision of nose.......        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30124...  T                   Removal of nose lesion.        311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
30125...  T                   Removal of nose lesion.        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30130...  T                   Removal of turbinate           313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               bones.
30140...  T                   Removal of turbinate           313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               bones.
30150...  T                   Partial removal of nose        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30160...  T                   Removal of nose........        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30200...  T                   Injection treatment of         347       2.93    $154.75       $62.15       $30.95
                               nose.
30210...  T                   Nasal sinus therapy....        311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
30220...  T                   Insert nasal septal            311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               button.
30300...  T                   Remove nasal foreign           311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               body.
30310...  T                   Remove nasal foreign           313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               body.
30320...  T                   Remove nasal foreign           313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               body.
30400...  T                   Reconstruction of nose.        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30410...  T                   Reconstruction of nose.        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30420...  T                   Reconstruction of nose.        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30430...  T                   Revision of nose.......        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30435...  T                   Revision of nose.......        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30450...  T                   Revision of nose.......        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30460...  T                   Revision of nose.......        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30462...  T                   Revision of nose.......        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30520...  T                   Repair of nasal septum.        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30540...  T                   Repair nasal defect....        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
30545...  T                   Repair nasal defect....        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
30560...  T                   Release of nasal               311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               adhesions.
30580...  T                   Repair upper jaw               313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               fistula.
30600...  T                   Repair mouth/nose              313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               fistula.
30620...  T                   Intranasal                     313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               reconstruction.
30630...  T                   Repair nasal septum            313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               defect.
30801...  T                   Cauterization inner            312       7.26    $383.95      $178.31       $76.79
                               nose.
30802...  T                   Cauterization inner            312       7.26    $383.95      $178.31       $76.79
                               nose.
30901...  T                   Control of nosebleed...        318       2.07    $109.70       $38.65       $21.94
30903...  T                   Control of nosebleed...        318       2.07     109.70       $38.65       $21.94
30905...  T                   Control of nosebleed...        318       2.07    $109.70       $38.65       $21.94
30906...  T                   Repeat control of              318       2.07    $109.70       $38.65       $21.94
                               nosebleed.
30915...  T                   Ligation nasal sinus           367      17.59    $930.48      $449.06      $186.10
                               artery.
30920...  T                   Ligation upper jaw             367      17.59    $930.48      $449.06      $186.10
                               artery.
30930...  T                   Therapy fracture of            312       7.26    $383.95      $178.31       $76.79
                               nose.
30999...  T                   Nasal surgery procedure        318       2.07    $109.70       $38.65       $21.94
31000...  T                   Irrigation maxillary           311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               sinus.
31002...  T                   Irrigation sphenoid            311       1.43     $75.42       $20.57       $15.08
                               sinus.
31020...  T                   Exploration maxillary          313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               sinus.
31030...  T                   Exploration maxillary          313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               sinus.
31032...  T                   Explore sinus, remove          313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               polyps.
31040...  T                   Exploration behind             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               upper jaw.
31050...  T                   Exploration sphenoid           313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               sinus.
31051...  T                   Sphenoid sinus surgery.        313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
31070...  T                   Exploration of frontal         313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               sinus.
31075...  T                   Exploration of frontal         314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31080...  T                   Removal of frontal             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31081...  T                   Removal of frontal             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31084...  T                   Removal of frontal             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31085...  T                   Removal of frontal             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31086...  T                   Removal of frontal             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31087...  T                   Removal of frontal             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31090...  T                   Exploration of sinuses.        314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
31200...  T                   Removal of ethmoid             313      15.81    $836.45      $411.09      $167.29
                               sinus.
31201...  T                   Removal of ethmoid             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31205...  T                   Removal of ethmoid             314      25.65  $1,356.54      $693.37      $271.31
                               sinus.
31225...  C                   Removal of upper jaw...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........
31230...  C                   Removal of upper jaw...  .........  .........  .........  ...........  ...........

[[Continued on page 47651]]
