Control of Air Pollution From New Motor Vehicles and New Mot

[Federal Register: February 23, 1996 (Volume 61, Number 37)] [Rules and
Regulations]
[Page 6949-6953]
>From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
40 CFR Part 86

[A-94-13; FRL-5425-9]
RIN 2060-AE07

Control of Air Pollution From New Motor Vehicles and New Motor Vehicle
Engines; Nonconformance Penalties for 1996 and 1998 Model Year Emission
Standards for Heavy-Duty Vehicles and Engines--Part II

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Direct final rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This final rule makes nonconformance penalties (NCPs) available
for the 1998 and later model year Heavy-Duty Engine (HDE) oxides of
nitrogen (NO<INF>X) standard for Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines (HDDEs), the
1996 and later model year Light-Duty Truck 3 (LDT3) NO<INF>X standard, and
the 1996 and later model year Urban Bus particulate matter (PM) standard.
The availability of NCPs will allow manufacturers whose vehicles or engines
fail to conform with these emission standards, but do not exceed a
designated upper limit, to be issued a certificate of conformity upon
payment of a monetary penalty. The associated upper limit will be the
previous standard (5.0 grams per brake horsepower-hour (g/BHp-hr) NO<INF>X
for HDDEs, 1.7 grams per mile (g/mi) NO<INF>X for LDT3s, and 0.07 g/BHp-hr
PM for urban buses). A final rule published elsewhere in this Federal
Register document addresses other emission standards for which NCPs have
been considered and establishes NCPs for the 1996 PM standard for LDT3.

EFFECTIVE DATE: This final rule will be effective April 23, 1996 unless
notice is received by March 25, 1996 that adverse or critical comments will
be submitted or that an opportunity to submit such comments at a public
hearing is requested. If such comments or a request for a public hearing
are received by the Agency, EPA will then publish a subsequent Federal
Register document withdrawing from this action only those items which are
specifically listed in those comments or in the request for a public
hearing.

ADDRESSES: Public Docket: Copies of materials relevant to this rulemaking
proceeding are contained in Public Docket A-94-13 at the Air Docket of the
US Environmental Protection Agency, Room M1500, 401 M Street, SW,
Washington, DC 20460, and are available for review in Room M1500 between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on weekdays. As provided in 40 CFR
Part 2, a reasonable fee may be charged for copying services.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Mr. Gregory Orehowsky, Manufacturers
Operations Division [6405-J], US Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M
Street, SW, Washington, DC 20460, telephone (202) 233-9292.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: EPA believes that the use of a direct final rule
is appropriate because the changes made are expected to be
noncontroversial. The direct final rule will allow the Agency to finalize
such changes in a timely manner, allowing NCPs to be available before the
start of production of affected vehicles.

I. Statutory Authority

Section 206(g) of the Clean Air Act (the Act), 42 U.S.C. 7525(g), requires
EPA to issue a certificate of conformity for HDEs or HeavyDuty Vehicles
(HDVs) which exceed an applicable section 202(a) emissions standard, but do
not exceed an upper limit associated with that standard, if the
manufacturer pays an NCP established by rulemaking. Congress adopted
section 206(g) in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977 as a response to
perceived problems with technologyforcing heavy-duty emissions standards.
(It should be noted, however, that the existence of NCPs does not change
the criteria under which the standards have been and will be set under
section 202.) Following International Harvester v. Ruckelshaus, 478 F.2d
615 (D.C. Cir. 1973), Congress realized the dilemma that technology-forcing
standards were likely to cause. If strict standards were maintained, then
some manufacturers, ``technological laggards,'' might be unable to comply
initially and would be forced out of the marketplace. NCPs were intended to
remedy this potential problem. The laggards would have a temporary
alternative that would permit them to sell their engines or vehicles by
payment of a penalty. This penalty is based in part, on the money saved
from the production of non complying engines, would protect conforming
manufacturers from the competitive disadvantage of making more costly

[[Page 6950]]
engines which comply with technology forcing standards. Under section
206(g)(1) of the Clean Air Act, NCPs may be offered for HDVs or HDEs. The
penalty may vary by pollutant and by class or category of vehicle or
engine.
HDVs are defined by section 202(b)(3)(C) of the Clean Air Act as vehicles
in excess of 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). The
light-duty truck (LDT) classification includes trucks that have a GVWR of
8,500 lbs or less. Therefore, certain LDTs may be classified as HDVs.
Historically, LDTs between 6,001 and 8,500 pounds GVWR have been considered
Heavy Light Duty Trucks (HLDTs). Based on various new requirements
established by the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, HLDTs have been
further subdivided into groups by weight. The HLDTs are divided at 5750 lbs
Adjusted Loaded Vehicle Weight (ALVW) which is the average of the curb
weight and the GVWR. The HLDTs that are up through 5750 lbs ALVW are called
Light Duty Trucks 3 (LDT3). Those above 5750 lbs ALVW but less than or
equal to 8500 lbs GVWR are Light Duty Trucks 4, or LDT4. The LDT3 and LDT4
subclasses make up the HLDT vehicle class. Since NCPs are only offered for
heavy duty vehicles or engines, this notice addresses only emission
standards for light duty trucks of the LDT3 and LDT4 categories. Section
206(g)(3) of the Clean Air Act requires that NCPs: (1) Account for the
degree of emission nonconformity; (2) Increase periodically to provide
incentive for nonconforming manufacturers to achieve the emission
standards; and (3) Remove the competitive disadvantage to conforming
manufacturers.
Section 206(g) authorizes EPA to require testing of production vehicles or
engines in order to determine the emission level on which the penalty is
based. If the emission level of a vehicle or engine exceeds an upper limit
of nonconformity established by EPA through regulation, the vehicle or
engine would not qualify for an NCP under section 206(g) and no certificate
of conformity could be issued to the manufacturer. If the emission level is
below the upper limit but above the standard, that emission level becomes
the ``compliance level,'' which is also the benchmark for warranty and
recall liability; the manufacturer who elects to pay the NCP is liable for
vehicles or engines that exceed the compliance level in-use, unless, for
the case of HLDTs, the compliance level is below the in-use standard. The
manufacturer does not have in-use warranty or recall liability for
emissions levels above the standard but below the compliance level.

II. Background

A. The Generic Nonconformance Penalty Rule

The generic NCP rule (Phase I) established three basic criteria for
determining the eligibility of emission standards for nonconformance
penalties in any given model year. See 40 CFR 1103-87. First, the emission
standard in question must become more difficult to meet. This can occur in
two ways, either by the emission standard itself becoming more stringent,
or due to its interaction with another emission standard that has become
more stringent. Second, substantial work must be required to meet the
emission standard. EPA considers ``substantial work'' to mean the
application of technology not previously used in that vehicle or engine
class/ subclass, or a significant modification of existing technology, to
bring that vehicle/engine into compliance. EPA does not consider minor
modifications or calibration changes to be classified as substantial work.
Third, a technological laggard must be likely to develop. A technological
laggard is defined as a manufacturer who cannot meet a particular emission
standard due to technological (not economic) difficulties and who, in the
absence of NCPs, might be forced from the marketplace. EPA will make the
determination that a technological laggard is likely to develop, based in
large part on the above two criteria. However, these criteria are not
always sufficient to determine the likelihood of the development of a
technological laggard. An emission standard may become more difficult to
meet and substantial work may be required for compliance, but if that work
merely involves transfer of well-developed technology from another vehicle
class, it is unlikely that a technological laggard would develop. The above
three criteria were used to determine eligibility for NCPs in Phase II of
the NCP rulemaking (50 FR 53454, December 31, 1985), in Phase III of the
NCP rulemaking (55 FR 46622, November 5, 1990) concerning the 1991 model
year HDE standards, and in Phase IV of the NCP rulemaking (58 FR 68532,
December 28, 1993) concerning HDVs and HDEs subject to the 1994 and later
model year emission standards for particulate matter (PM).
As in the previous NCP rules, EPA is specifying values for the following
parameters in the NCP formula for each standard: COC<INF>50, COC<INF>90,
MC<INF>50, and F. The NCP formula is the same as that promulgated in the
Phase I rule.
COC<INF>50 is an estimate of the industry wide average incremental cost per
engine (references to engines are intended to include vehicles as well)
associated with meeting the standard for which an NCP is offered, compared
with meeting the upper limit. COC<INF>50 is based on typical engine
technology, as nearly as EPA can identify it. As in the previous NCP rules,
costs include additional manufacturer costs and additional owner costs. The
other NCP rules did not include certification costs in the calculation of
COC<INF>50, and none will be allowed in this proposed rule because both
complying and noncomplying manufacturers must incur certification costs.
COC<INF>90 is EPA's best estimate of the 90th percentile incremental cost
per engine associated with meeting the standard for which an NCP is
offered, compared with meeting the associated upper limit. COC<INF>90 is
based on a near worst case technology, as nearly as EPA can identify it.
COC<INF>90, like COC<INF>50, includes both manufacturer and owner costs,
but not certification costs. MC<INF>50 is an estimate of the industry wide
average marginal cost of compliance per unit of reduced pollutant
associated with the least cost effective emission control technology
installed to meet the new standard. MC<INF>50 is measured in dollars per
g/BHP-hr for HDEs and in dollars per gram per mile (g/mi) for LDTs. F is a
factor used to derive MC<INF>90, the 90th percentile marginal cost of
compliance with the NCP standard for engines in the NCP category. MC<INF>90
is defined as being the slope of the penalty rate curve near the standard
and is equal to MC<INF>50 multiplied by F. For this rulemaking, as was the
case in the previous NCP rules, EPA has determined that no reasonable
estimate of MC<INF>90 can be made based on existing marginal cost data and
has thus set F at a presumptive value of 1.2. This approach was generally
supported by commentaries on the past NCP rulemakings.

B. Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

In the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) (59 FR 43074, August 22, 1994),
EPA identified the Tier I Heavy Light-Duty Trucks (HLDT) NO<INF>X standard
of 0.98 g/mi becoming effective in 1996, the 1998 HDE NO<INF>X standard of
4.0 g/

[[Page 6951]]
BHp-hr, and the 1996 Urban Bus PM standard of 0.05 g/BHp-hr as new
standards for which it has statutory authority for considering NCPs. EPA
did not propose to offer NCPs for these standards because, based on the
information available at the time of the proposed rulemaking, these
standards did not meet the criteria for offering NCPs.

C. Summary and Analysis of Comments

Based on comments to the NPRM received by EPA, EPA has decided to offer
NCPs for the 1996 Light Duty Trucks 3 (LDT3) NO<INF>X standard of 0.98 g/mi
for diesel-fueled vehicles, the 1998 HDE NO<INF>X standard of 4.0 g/BHp-hr
for HDDEs, and the 1996 Urban Bus PM standard of 0.05 g/ BHp-hr.

  1.  Heavy Light Duty Trucks 3 NO<INF>X Standard General Motors, the only
     manufacturer in this market, commented that NCPs are justified for
     this standard since ``* * * the NO<INF>X standard change is large (1.7
     g/mi to 0.98 g/mi) * * *'' and ``attempts to reach significantly lower
     NO<INF>X levels with the current technology results in very poor
     engine combustion control with significant increased smoke * * *'' GM
     goes on to state that new technology is required which ``concentrates
     on new EGR systems and control interfaces between this EGR technology
     and the fuel control system * * *''
     EPA agrees with GM's assessment that current EGR flow rates cannot be
     increased to limit NO<INF>X emissions without changes to the fuel
     control system. Driveabiliity problems will occur at higher EGR flow
     rates unless the fuel control system is adjusted to account for these
     higher EGR flow rates. EPA believes that GM will need to recalibrate
     the engine computer to better control fuel delivery rates to allow for
     improved driveability at increased EGR flow rates. EPA also believes
     that air-to-air aftercooling will be necessary to further reduce
     NO<INF>X emissions below the standard. EPA acknowledges that the
     stringency of the NO<INF>X standard for this class of trucks has
     increased. Also, significant work will be involved in developing the
     appropriate fuel system calibration to allow for increased EGR flow.
     Further work will be necessary to develop airto -air aftercooling
     which is new to this segment of the truck market. Since the previously
     mentioned technology may not be developed by the start of the 1996
     model year, a technological laggard may develop. For these reasons,
     EPA is offering NCPs for 1996 LTD3 NO<INF>X standard.
  2.  1996 HDDE Urban Bus PM Standard
     Detroit Diesel Corporation (DDC) commented that they are capable of
     achieving 0.05 g/BHp-hr in development engines using only a catalytic
     converter, but they need new technology to ensure that production
     engines would be capable of satisfying the new standard during
     Selective Enforcement Audit (SEA) testing. The Engine Manufacturers
     Association (EMA) stated that for the 1996 model year Urban Bus Engine
     PM standard the three criteria for offering NCPs are met. In the 1996
     model year the PM standard applicable to Urban Bus Engines becomes
     more stringent. EPA acknowledges that new technologies need to be
     developed to provide for a compliance margin for SEA testing. These
     technologies include improving aftertreatment devices such as
     catalysts and traps and new turbocharger designs. EPA believes that
     substantial work will be involved in developing this diesel fueled
     technology. Particulate traps have not proven to be durable. Catalysts
     have reduced PM emissions but further reductions are necessary. Low
     inertia turbochargers are being developed but have yet to be offered
     in the urban bus market and their effectiveness is uncertain. EPA
     believes that Urban Bus Engine manufacturers will need to employ the
     unproven technology mentioned in the preceding paragraph to ensure
     compliance with this standard, thus; EPA believes a technological
     laggard is likely to develop and will be offering NCPs.
  3.  1998 HDE NO<INF>X Standard
     EMA commented that ``based on the information presently available, it
     is likely that certain engine manufacturers and/or certain engine
     families may not be able to meet the 4.0 g/bhp-hr NO<INF>X standard in
     1998''. Mack Truck suggested that NCPs should be offered for this
     standard since they were offered for the 1988 and 1991 NO<INF>X
     standards. DDC commented that several of their most advanced engines
     are using credits to meet the 1994 standards. Because of the
     NO<INF>XPM trade off and the stringency of the 1994 PM standard, none
     of their engines are capable of generating NO<INF>X credits which
     could be used toward the 1998 NO<INF>X standard. This could result in
     DDC having to discontinue several of its engine ratings in 1998.
     Navistar commented that a commercially important engine may not be
     finished in time causing an interruption in manufacturing. Navistar
     stated that NCPs would allow such an engine to be put into commerce.
     In the 1998 model year the NO<INF>X standard applicable to HDEs will
     become more stringent. EPA believes that this increase in stringency
     will require the HDE manufacturers to employ new emission control
     technology (e.g., oxidation catalysts, improved turbochargers,
     modifications to the fuel injection systems, or engine calibration
     changes). These new technologies will require substantial work. Also
     based on manufacturers' comments to the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
     (59 FR 43074, August 22, 1994), EPA now believes that a technological
     laggard may develop. Therefore, EPA has decided to offer NCPs for the
     1998 model year HDE NO<INF>X standard.

III. Standards Addressed in a Concurrent NCP Rulemaking

a. 1996 Tier 1 Standards for LDT3 other than diesel NO<INF>X b. 1996 Tier 1
Standards for LDT4

IV. Penalty Rates and Upper Limits

This rule is the most recent in a series of NCP rulemakings. The discussion
of penalty rates in the Phase IV rulemaking (58 FR 68532, December 28,
1993), Phase III rulemaking (55 FR 46622, November 5, 1990), the Phase II
rulemaking (50 FR 53454, December 31, 1985) as well as the Phase I
rulemaking (50 FR 35374, August 30, 1985) are incorporated by reference.
The derivation of the proposed cost parameters is described in a support
document entitled ``Calculation of Nonconformance Penalty Rates for 1996
and Later Model Year LDT3 Particulate Matter (PM), LDT3 Oxides of Nitrogen
(NO<INF>X), 1996 and Later Model Year Urban Bus Particulate Matter (PM),
and 1998 and Later Model Year HDDE Oxides of Nitrogen (NO<INF>X)
Standards'' which is available in the public docket for this rulemaking.
The associated upper limits of 1.7 g/mi NO<INF>X and 0.12 g/mi PM for
diesel LDT3, 5.0 g/BHp-hr NO<INF>X for HDDEs, and 0.07 g/ BHp-hr PM for
urban bus engines were determined from the previous standards as per
Section 86.1104-91 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).

V. Administrative Designation and Regulatory Analysis

Under Executive Order 12866 (58 FR 51735, October 4, 1993), EPA must
determine whether the regulatory action is ``significant'' and therefore
subject to OMB review and the requirements of the Executive Order. The
order defines ``significant regulatory action'' as one that is likely to
result in a rule that may:

[[Page 6952]]
(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or
adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the economy,
productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety,
or state, local, or tribal governments or communities; (2) create a serious
inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by
another agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements,
grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of
recipients thereof; or (4) raise novel legal or policy issues arising out
of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles set forth
in the Executive Order.
Pursuant to the terms of Executive Order 12866, it has been determined that
this rule is not a ``significant regulatory action.'' This regulation will
not have an annual effect on the economy in excess of $100 million and will
not cause a major increase in the price of HDEs above those that would
otherwise occur from compliance with the emission standards themselves.
This regulation is intended to assist manufacturers that are having
difficulty developing and marketing vehicles which comply with the 1996
Tier 1 PM standard for LDT3s. Without this rule, a manufacturer
experiencing difficulty in complying with this new emission standard (after
the use of credits) has only two alternatives: fix the nonconforming
engines for the associated model years or not sell them at all. NCPs
provide manufacturers with additional time to bring their engines into
conformity. In addition, NCPs are calculated to deprive nonconforming
manufacturers of any cost savings and competitive advantages stemming from
marketing a nonconforming engine. Thus, NCPs will not have significant
adverse effects on competition, employment, investment, productivity,
innovation or on the ability of United States-based enterprises to compete
with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets.

VI. Economic Impact

Because the use of NCPs is optional, manufacturers have the flexibility and
will likely choose whether or not to use NCPs based on their ability to
comply with emissions standards. If a HDE manufacturer elects not to use
NCPs, the manufacturer and its customers will not incur any additional
costs related to NCPs. NCPs remedy the potential problem of having a
manufacturer forced out of the marketplace due to that manufacturer's
inability to conform to new, strict emission standards in a timely manner.
Without NCPs, a manufacturer which has difficulty certifying HDEs in
conformance with emission standards or whose engines fail a SEA has only
two alternatives: fix the nonconforming engines, perhaps at a prohibitive
cost, or prevent their introduction into commerce. The availability of NCPs
provides manufacturers with a third alternative: continue production and
introduce into commerce upon payment of a penalty for an engine that
exceeds the standard until an emission conformance technique is developed.
Therefore, NCPs represent a regulatory mechanism that allows affected
manufacturers to have increased flexibility. A decision to use NCPs may be
a manufacturer's only way to continue to introduce HDEs into commerce.
Hence, NCPs may be considered to have no adverse economic impact.

VII. Environmental Impact

When evaluating the environmental impact of this rule, one must keep in
mind that, under the Clean Air Act, NCPs are a consequence of enacting new,
more stringent emissions requirements for heavy duty engines. Emission
standards are set at a level that most, but not necessarily all,
manufacturers can achieve by the model year in which the standard becomes
effective. Following International Harvester v. Ruckelshaus, 478 F.2d 615
(D.C. Cir. 1973), Congress realized the dilemma that technology-forcing
standards were likely to cause, and allowed manufacturers of heavy-duty
engines to certify nonconforming vehicles/engines upon the payment of an
NCP, under certain conditions. This mechanism would allow a manufacturer(s)
who cannot meet technology-forcing standards immediately to continue to
manufacture these nonconforming engines while they tackle the technological
problems associated with meeting new emission standard(s). Thus, as part of
the statutory structure to force technological improvements without driving
manufacturers out of the market, NCPs provide flexibility that fosters
long-term emissions improvement through the setting of lower emission
standards at an earlier date than could otherwise be possible. By design,
NCPs encourage the technological laggard that is using NCPs to reduce
emission levels to the more stringent standard as quickly as possible.

VIII. Compliance With Regulatory Flexibility Act

Under section 605 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601, et seq.,
the Administrator is required to either perform a regulatory flexibility
analysis or certify that this regulation will not have a significant impact
on a substantial number of small business entities. None of the affected
manufacturers could be classified as small. Moreover, as already discussed,
the NCP program can be expected to benefit manufacturers.
Some small entities do exist as manufacturers' contractors for the testing
of engines for Production Compliance Audits (PCAs). It is EPA's practice to
conduct PCA scheduling (namely, tests per day limitations) in such a way as
to consider the staff and manpower capabilities of such contractors and
avoid any problems. The result is that these entities are not adversely
affected. Thus, I certify that this rule will not have any adverse economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities.

IX. Information Collection Requirements

This rule requires that manufacturers perform certain record keeping and
submit certain reports to EPA. The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44
U.S.C. 3501, et seq., provides that reporting and record keeping
requirements be approved by OMB before they can be enforced by EPA. The
information collection requirements in this proposed rule have been
addressed in previous rulemaking and approved by OMB (OMB control no.
2060-0132). However, any person wishing to comment on these requirements is
invited to do so. Comments on these requirements should be submitted to
Chief, Information Policy Branch, Mail Code 2136, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 401 M St., S.W., Washington, DC 20460 and to Office of
Management and Budget (OMB), Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
726 Jackson Place, NW, Washington, DC 20503, marked ``Attention: Desk
Officer for EPA.''

X. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

Title II of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA), P.L. 104-4,
establishes requirements for Federal agencies to assess the effects of
their regulatory actions on State, local, and tribal governments and the
private sector. Under section 202 of the UMRA, EPA generally must prepare a
written statement, including a cost benefit analysis, for proposed and
final rules

[[Page 6953]]
with ``Federal mandates'' that may result in expenditures to State, local,
and tribal governments, in the aggregate, or to the private sector, of $100
million or more in any one year. Before promulgating an EPA rule for which
a written statement is needed, section 205 of the UMRA generally requires
EPA to identify and consider a reasonable number of regulatory alternative
and adopt the least costly, most cost effective, or least burdensome
alternative that achieves the objectives of the rule. The provisions of
section 205 do not apply when they are inconsistent with applicable law.
Moreover, section 205 allows EPA to adopt an alternative other than the
least costly, most cost-effective, or least burdensome alternative if the
Administrator publishes with the final rule an explanation why that
alternative was not adopted. Before EPA establishes any regulatory
requirements that may significantly or uniquely affect small governments,
including tribal governments, it must have developed under section 203 of
the UMRA a small government agency plan. The plan must provide for
notifying potentially affected small governments, enabling officials of
affected small governments to have meaningful and timely input in the
development of EPA regulatory proposals with significant Federal
intergovernmental mandates, and informing, educating, and advising small
governments on compliance with the regulatory requirements.
Today's rule contains no federal mandates (under the regulatory provisions
of Title II of the UMRA) for State, local, or tribal governments or the
private sector. The rule imposes no enforceable duties on any of these
governmental entities or the private sector. In addition, the UMRA excludes
from the definition of ``Federal private sector mandate'' duties that arise
from participation in a voluntary federal program. Thus, this rule is not
subject to the requirements of sections 202 and 205 of the UMRA.

List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 86

Environmental protection, Administrative practice and procedure, Air
pollution control, Gasoline, Motor vehicles, Labeling, Motor vehicle
pollution, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

Dated: February 12, 1996.
Carol M. Browner,
Administrator.

For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 40 CFR part 86, is amended as
follows:

PART 86-CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION FROM NEW AND IN-USE MOTOR VEHICLES AND NEW
AND IN-USE MOTOR VEHICLE ENGINES: CERTIFICATION AND TEST PROCEDURES

  1.  The authority citation for part 86 continues to read as follows:

Authority: Secs. 202, 203, 206, 207, 208, 215, 216, 217, 301(a), Clean Air
Act as amended (42 U.S.C. 7521, 7522, 7524, 7525, 7541, 7542, 7549, 7550,
7552, and 7601(a)).

2. Section 86.1105-87 of subpart L is amended by adding paragraphs (g)(2)
and (3) and paragraph (h), reading as follows:

Sec. 86.1105-87 Emission standards for which nonconformance penalties are
available.

   *  * * * *
     (g) * * *
     (2) Light-duty truck 3 diesel-fueled vehicle at full useful life (as
     defined in Sec. 86.094-2) oxides of nitrogen emission standard of 0.98
     g/mi.
     (i) The following values shall be used to calculate an NCP for the
     standard set forth in Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec.
     86.1113-87(a):
     (A) COC<INF>50: $654.
     (B) COC<INF>90: $779.
     (C) MC<INF>50: $908 per gram per mile. (D) F: 1.2.
     (ii) The following factor shall be used to calculate the engineering
     and development component of the NCP for the standard set forth in
     Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec. 86.1113-87(h): 0.082.
     (3) 1996 Urban Bus (as defined in Sec. 86.094-2) particulate matter
     emission standard of 0.05 g/BHp-hr.
     (i) The following values shall be used to calculate an NCP for the
     standard set forth in Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec.
     86.1113-87(a):
     (A) COC<INF>50: $576.
     (B) COC<INF>90: $6,569.
     (C) MC<INF>50: $28,800 per gram per brake horsepower-hour. (D) F: 1.2.
     (ii) The following factor shall be used to calculate the engineering
     and development component of the NCP for the standard set forth in
     Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec. 86.1113-87(h): 0.500.
     (h) Effective in the 1998 model year, NCPs will be available for the
     following emission standard:
     (1) Petroleum-fueled diesel heavy-duty engine oxides of nitrogen
     standard of 4.0 grams per brake horsepower-hour. (i) For
     petroleum-fueled light heavy-duty diesel engines: (A) The following
     values shall be used to calculate an NCP in accordance with Sec.
     86.1113-87(a):
     (1) COC<INF>50: $833.
     (2) COC<INF>90: $1,513.
     (3) MC<INF>50: $833 per gram per brake horsepower-hour. (4) F: 1.2.
     (B) The following factor shall be used to calculate the engineering
     and development component of the NCP for the standard set forth in
     Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec. 86.1113-87(h): 0.039.
     (ii) For petroleum-fueled medium heavy-duty diesel engines: (A) The
     following values shall be used to calculate an NCP in accordance with
     Sec. 86.1113-87(a):
     (1) COC<INF>50: $444.
     (2) COC<INF>90: $1,368.
     (3) MC<INF>50: $444 per gram per brake horsepower-hour. (4) F: 1.2.
     (B) The following factor shall be used to calculate the engineering
     and development component of the NCP for the standard set forth in
     Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec. 86.1113-87(h): 0.043.
     (iii) For petroleum-fueled heavy heavy-duty diesel engines: (A) The
     following values shall be used to calculate an NCP in accordance with
     Sec. 86.1113-87(a):
     (1) COC<INF>50: $1,086.
     (2) COC<INF>90: $2,540.
     (3) MC<INF>50: $1,086 per gram per brake horsepower-hour (4) F: 1.2.
     (B) The following factor shall be used to calculate the engineering
     and development component of the NCP for the standard set forth in
     Sec. 86.094-9(a)(1)(ii) in accordance with Sec. 86.1113-87(h): 0.039.
     (2) [Reserved]

[FR Doc. 96-4039 Filed 2-22-96; 8:45 am] BILLING CODE 6560-50-P
