                              U.S. Office of Personnel Management
              Office of Merit Systems Oversight and Effectiveness
                         Classification Appeals and FLSA Programs
                                                                 
              Office of Merit Systems Oversight and Effectiveness
                                                1900 E Street, NW
                                        Washington, DC 20415-6000



Fair Labor Standards Act Decision
Under section 4(f) of title 29, United States Code


	Claimant:		[claimant]

	Agency classification:	Quality Assurance Specialist
				(Aerospace), GS-1910-11

	Organization:		[agency]

	Claim:			Exemption status and compensation for 
				time traveled in connection with training.

	OPM decision:		Exempt. 
				Overtime payment due.

	OPM decision number:	F-1910-11-04


                                 /s/
                                 _____________________________
                                 Deborah Y. McKissick
                                 FLSA Claims Officer


                                 4/15/02
                                 _____________________________
                                 Date


As  provided  in section 551.708 of title 5, Code  of  Federal
Regulations  (CFR),  this is binding  on  all  administrative,
certifying,  payroll, disbursing, and accounting officials  of
agencies  for which Office of Personnel Management administers
the  Fair Labor Standards Act.  The agency should identify all
similarly situated current and, to the extent possible, former
employees,  and  ensure  that they are  treated  in  a  manner
consistent  with this decision.  There is no right of  further
administrative   appeal.    This  decision   is   subject   to
discretionary  review only under conditions  and  time  limits
specified in 5 CFR 551.708 (address provided in 551.710).  The
claimant  has  the  right to bring action in  the  appropriate
Federal court if dissatisfied with the decision.


                        Decision sent to:

[Claimant]

[agency representatives' names and addresses]

Carlos A. Torrico
FLSA Claims Officer
U.S. Office of Personnel Management
San Francisco Oversight Division
120 Howard Street, Room 760
San Francisco, California 94105


Introduction

On July 20, 2000, the San Francisco Oversight Division of the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) received a Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) claim from [claimant]. The claimant
believes he is owed payment for time traveled in connection
with training for the period of October 18, 1999.  The
claimant works with the [agency].  During the claim period,
the claimant was a Quality Assurance Specialist (Aerospace),
GS- 1910-12.  Because of program changes in OPM, the San
Francisco Oversight Division sent the claim to OPM’s claims
office in Washington, DC for processing on July 12, 2001.  We
accepted and decided his claim under section 4(f) of title 29
(FLSA), United States Code.

In reaching our FLSA decision, we have carefully reviewed all
information furnished by the claimant and his agency.  We also
conducted a telephone interview with the claimant and the
claimant’s supervisor.

General issues

The agency designated the claimant’s position, Quality
Assurance Specialist (Aerospace), GS-1910-11, as exempt.  The
claimant believes he should be designated as nonexempt and
also be compensated for time spent traveling outside his
scheduled work hours during the period of October 18, 1999.

The claimant references the July 14, 1999 settlement agreement
between headquarters [two agency components] and certain
American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE) locals,
regarding the FLSA status of certain bargaining unit
positions.  He also references the September 9, 1999
settlement agreement between the [agency component] and
Bargaining Unit Employees of the National Federation of
Federal Employees (NFFE) Local 1614, regarding the FLSA status
of certain bargaining unit positions.  The claimant notes that
there was a dispute regarding the FLSA exemption status for
the Quality Assurance Specialist, GS-1910-11 grade level.
However, we must make our decision solely by comparing
claimants’ duties and responsibilities to Federal regulations
and other Federal guidelines.  Since comparison to Federal
guidelines is the exclusive method for making exemption
decisions, we cannot compare the claimant’s position to others
as a basis for deciding his claim.

Background information

The claimant believes that his FLSA exemption status, exempt,
is incorrect.  The claimant believes that his FLSA exemption
status should be nonexempt, covered by the Fair Labor
Standards Act.

The essential facts surrounding this claim are not in dispute.

·    The claimant’s position was designated by the agency as
  exempt, not covered by the FLSA.

·    The claimant is not a member of a collective bargaining
  unit or a party of either of the settlement agreements.

·    The claimant’s unit was not covered by a negotiated
  agreement.

·    The claimant was a Quality Assurance Specialist
  (Aerospace), GS-1910-11, working as a Quality Program Manager
  at [contract facility] during the claim period.

Evaluation

FLSA Exemption Designation

The claimant believes that he was covered by the terms of the
settlement agreement because the Quality Assurance Specialist,
GS-1910-11, position’s FLSA designation was in dispute. The
claimant’s position was not included in the settlement
agreement, and neither the agency nor the claimant provided
documents that establish a conclusion to the dispute regarding
the FLSA designation for Quality Assurance Specialist, GS-1910-
11.

The designation of an employee as FLSA exempt or nonexempt
ultimately rests on the duties actually performed by the
employee (5 CFR 551.202).  Sections 551.205, 551.206, and
551.207 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (5 CFR)
contain criteria governing whether the claimant’s position
should be exempt from the FLSA.

Executive Exemption Criteria

The executive exemption criteria in 5 CFR 551.205, define an
"executive" as a supervisor, or manager who manages a Federal
agency or any subdivision thereof (including the lowest
recognized organizational unit with a continuing function) and
customarily and regularly directs the work of subordinate
employees.  Because the claimant does not supervise, his work
does not meet the exemption definition of executive criteria
as described in 5 CFR 551.205.

Professional Exemption Criteria

The professional exemption criteria in 5 CFR 551.207, define a
professional employee as an employee, or any teacher who is
engaged in the imparting of knowledge or in the administration
of an academic program in a school system or educational
establishment.  A professional employee may also be an
individual that performs work that requires theoretical and
practical application of highly specialized knowledge in
computer systems analysis, programming, and software
engineering or other similar work in the computer software
field.  Based on the information provided, the claimant’s work
does not meet the exemption definition of professional
criteria as described in 5 CFR 551.207.

Administrative Exemption Criteria

Under the administrative exemption criteria contained in 5 CFR
551.206, an administrative employee is an advisor or assistant
to management, a representative of management, or a specialist
in a management or general business function or supporting
service who meets all of the four required criteria:

(a)  The employee’s primary duty consists of work that - -

  (1)  Significantly affects the formulation or execution of
     management policies or programs; or
  
  (2)  Involves general management or business functions or
     supporting services of substantial importance to the
     organization serviced; or

  (3)  Involves substantial participation in the executive or
     administrative functions of a management official.

(b)  The employee performs office or other predominantly
  nonmanual work which is - -

  (1)  Intellectual and varied in nature; or
  
  (2)  Of a specialized or technical nature that requires
     considerable special training, experience, and knowledge.

(c)  The employee must frequently exercise discretion and
  independent judgment, under only general supervision, in
  performing the normal day-to-day work.

(d)  In addition to the primary duty criterion that applies to
  all employees, General Schedule employees classified at GS-5
  or GS-6 (or the equivalent in other while collar systems) must
  spend 80 percent or more of the worktime in a representative
  workweek on administrative functions and work that is an
  essential part of those functions.

  The claimant does meet (a)(1).

OPM defines the formulation or execution of management
programs and policies as work that involves management
programs and policies, which range from broad national goals
expressed in statutes or Executive Orders to specific
objectives of a small field office.  Employees make policy
decisions or participate indirectly through developing
proposals that are acted on by others.  Employees
significantly affect the execution of management policies or
programs typically when the work involves obtaining compliance
with such policies by individuals or organizations, within or
outside the Federal government, or making significant
determinations in furthering the operation of programs and
accomplishing program objectives.  Administrative employees
engaged in such work typically perform one or more phases of
program management, i.e., planning, developing, promoting,
coordinating, controlling, or evaluating operating programs.

The claimant’s supervisor stated that the claimant monitors
[contractor] to ensure that the company’s facilities are in
compliance with all federal contract requirements that cover
product manufacturing, inspecting, test, and delivery of
equipment.  He added that the claimant’s duties and
responsibilities of planning and implementing the quality
assurance program affects the creation or execution of the
agency’s management programs or policies.
The claimant’s position description states that the claimant
is a program manager responsible for planning, developing,
implementing, and administering an in-plant quality assurance
program as a resident Quality Assurance Specialist in a
contractor facility.  We find this to be an accurate depiction
of the claimant’s duties.

       The claimant does meet (a)(2).

Work that involves general management, business, or supporting
services includes a wide variety of specialists who provide
support to line managers by providing expert advice in
specialized fields, such as that provided by management
consultants or systems analysts; by assuming facets of the
overall management function, such as personnel management or
financial management; by representing management in business
functions, such as negotiating contracts; or by providing
support services, such as procurement and distribution of
supplies.

According to the claimant’s position description, the claimant
reviews purchase contracts from vendors and issues delegations
of authority to subcontractors in the field.  He also provides
support to the line managers in production, engineering and
quality by assuring that  acceptable quality evidence exists
for performance of such things as purchased materials and
vendor controls, shipment and key processes.  The claimant
assesses the contractor’s purchased material or vendor quality
assurance controls and, as required, selectively requests
Government quality assurance support at subcontract level to
verify adequacy of prime contractor controls.  The claimant’s
assessment serves as advice in the specialized field of
quality assurance.

     The claimant does not meet (a)(3).

Work involving participation in the functions of a management
official includes employees, such as secretaries and
administrative assistants, who participate in portions of the
managerial or administrative functions of a supervisor whose
scope of responsibility precludes personally attending to all
aspects of the work.  To support exemption, such assistants
must have knowledge of the policies, plans, and views of the
supervisor and must be delegated and exercise substantial
authority to act for the supervisor.

The claimant does not perform the duties of a secretary or
administrative assistant, nor is he authorized to act for the
supervisor.

     The claimant does meet (b)(1).

Work of an intellectual nature requires general intellectual
abilities, such as perceptiveness, analytical reasoning,
perspective, and judgment applied to a variety of subject
matter fields, or work involving mental processes which
involve substantial judgment based on considering, selecting,
adapting, and applying principles to numerous variables.  The
employee cannot rely on standardized procedures, or
precedents, but must recognize and evaluate the effect of a
continual variety of conditions or requirements in selecting,
adapting or innovating techniques and procedures, interpreting
findings, and selecting and recommending the best alternative
from among a broad range of possible actions.

During fact-finding, it was learned that the claimant exhibits
skills in interpreting, explaining, and proofing technical
requirements and processes to document process flows,
identifies and establishes key process measuring points, and
analyzes contractor data and process variations.  The claimant
also uses defect analysis techniques to identify chronic cause
of nonconformance and associated costs, and to analyze
contractor and Government data.  These evaluative judgments
apply analytical reasoning and perspective in the management
of the organization’s quality assurance program.

     The claimant does meet (b)(2).

OPM guidance indicates that work which is of a specialized or
technical nature requiring considerable specialized training,
experience, and knowledge means specialized knowledge of a
complex subject matter and of the principles, techniques,
practices, and procedures associated with that subject matter
field.  That knowledge characteristically is acquired through
considerable on-the-job training and experience in the
specialized subject matter field.  The in-depth practical
knowledge required by the claimant to provide technical
assistance would typically come from several years of on-the-
job training and experience.

The claimant has a comprehensive knowledge of aerospace
systems and primary structural components of the systems,
including launch vehicles, and spacecraft. The claimant
acquired his in-depth knowledge through on-the-job experience
and by completing courses to earn certification in Aircraft,
Electronics and Aerospace systems and products.  This
specialized knowledge enables the claimant to carry out his
program management duties.

     The claimant does meet (c).

Established OPM guidance is that the exercise of discretion
and independent judgment involves interpreting results or
implications, and independently taking action or making a
decision after considering the various possibilities.  The
work must involve sufficient variables as to regularly require
discretion and judgment; the employee must have the authority
to make determinations or take action; and the decisions must
be significant.  Employees who perform work requiring
primarily skill in applying standardized techniques or
knowledge of established procedures, precedents or other
guidelines that specifically govern their actions do not meet
this element.  In addition, deciding whether a situation does
or does not conform to clearly applicable criteria is not
considered making significant decisions.

Under general supervision, the claimant works in contractor
facilities completing projects, such as testing [system].  The
claimant uses discretion and independent judgment in
interpreting the guidelines and policies, which apply to
interpret the requirements of contracts, and in resolving
conflicts with the contractor over technical requirements of
contract and specifications.

     Criterion (d) is not applicable to the claimant’s
position.

The claimant meets all of the administrative criteria.



Decision

Based on the above analysis, the claimant’s position does not
meet the executive exemption nor the professional exemption
criteria.  However, the claimant’s position meets the
administrative exemption criteria, and is therefore, exempt,
i.e., not covered by the provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act.

Time Spent Traveling

The claimant believes that he is entitled to overtime pay for
time spent traveling outside of his established work hours and
outside of his duty-station in connection with the [system]
mission ground support on October 18, 1999.

5 CFR 550.112(g) is used to determine hours of work for travel
for FLSA exempt who are covered by the overtime pay provisions
of title 5, United States Code (5 U.S.C.), section 5542.  5
CFR § 550.112(g) defines the situations that designate time in
travel as overtime and it reads,

     Time in travel status.  Time in travel status away from
the official
     duty-station of an employee is deemed employment only
when:
     
     (1)  It is within his regularly scheduled administrative
       workweek, including
           regular overtime work; or
     
     (2)  The travel -

       (i)  Involves the performance of actual work while traveling;
       
       (ii) Is incident to travel that involves the performance of
            work while traveling;

       (iii)     Is carried out under such arduous and unusual
            conditions that the
                              travel is inseparable from work;
or
       
       (iv) Results from an event, which could not be scheduled or
            controlled administratively, including, travel by an employee
            to such an event and the return of the employee to his or her
            official-duty station.

5 CFR 550.112(g)(2)(iv) applies to the claimant’s situation.
The Federal agency did not administratively control the
scheduling of traveling time for trips in question to El
Segundo, California.  The work was ordered and approved by the
supervisor.  Therefore, the time spent traveling to El
Segundo, California was compensable at the overtime rates
prescribed in 5 U.S.C. § 5542(b)(2)(B).

Compensation for overtime should be authorized because the
travel results from an event that could not be scheduled or
administratively controlled, and there is an immediate
official necessity concerning the event that requires travel
outside the employee’s regular duty hours.  Barth v. U.S., 568
F.2d 1329, 1332 (Ct. Cl. 1978); Jordan, 72 Comp. Gen. 286, 287
(1993); Department of Housing and Urban Development, 70 Comp.
Gen. 77 (1990); William A. Lewis, et. al, 69 Comp. Gen. 545,
547 (1990).

Decision

Requests for overtime under title 5 for time spent traveling
to attend overseas meeting dates may be denied because the
agency controls administratively the scheduling of the event.
However, the claimant’s agency did not administratively
control the scheduling of the overseas meeting dates which
required the claimant to travel outside the employee’s duty
station and outside the employee’s regularly scheduled
workweek.  The start and end time of the events were scheduled
not by the claimant’s agency, but by someone or some
organization outside the Executive branch of government - -
[contractor] and its customers.  William A. Lewis, et al., 69
Comp. Gen. 545 (1990).

Based on the above analysis, the claimant is owed compensation
for the following time spent traveling outside his scheduled
work hours:

     1.   TDY to El Segundo, California, Travel Order [#], Sunday,
       October 18, 1999.

Compliance instructions

There is a six-year statute of limitation for employees
covered by title 5 (exempt from FLSA).  The claimant can
receive back pay for six years from the date his claim was
received by OPM, which was July 20, 2000.  Therefore, he can
receive compensation for the requested claim period of October
18, 1999.

The agency should pay the claimant the total owed him.  If the
claimant believes that the agency has computed the amount
incorrectly, he may file a new compensation claim with OPM.


