FR Doc 04-8972
[Federal Register: April 21, 2004 (Volume 69, Number 77)]
[Proposed Rules]               
[Page 21455-21482]
From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:fr21ap04-21]                         

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

POSTAL SERVICE

39 CFR Part 111

 
Standards Governing the Design of Wall-Mounted Centralized Mail 
Receptacles

AGENCY: Postal Service.

ACTION: Proposed rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Postal ServiceTM is proposing to replace United 
States Postal Service[reg] Standard 4B, Receptacles, Apartment House, 
Mail, which governs the design of wall-mounted centralized mail 
receptacles whether used in commercial, residential, mixed residential, 
or other types of structures. The proposed standard was developed 
through a consensus process and was agreed to by a committee of 
representatives from mailbox manufacturers; mailbox distributors; 
mailbox installers and servicers; Postal Service customers; multiunit 
residential and commercial property builders, owners, and managers; and 
the Postal Service. Proposed provisions in the Domestic Mail Manual 
would provide manufacturers and customers with notice of the 
specifications.

[[Page 21456]]


DATES: The Postal Service must receive written comments on or before 
May 21, 2004.

ADDRESSES: Written comments should be mailed or delivered to the 
Manager, Delivery Operations, U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, 
SW., Room 7142, Washington, DC 20260-2802. Comments also may be sent 
electronically to wallmountedreceptacles@usps.gov. Copies of all 
written and e-mail comments will be available for public inspection and 
copying between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, at the above 
address.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jeffery W. Lewis, (202) 268-5233.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: United States Postal Service Standard 4B, 
Receptacles, Apartment House, Mail, USPS-STD-4B, currently governs the 
design of apartment house mailboxes. This standard, adopted in 1975, 
prescribes design limitations in terms that are no longer consistent 
with the operational requirements of the Postal Service. The proposed 
revised standard is titled United States Postal Service Standard 4C, 
Wall-Mounted Centralized Mail Receptacles. The change in the title for 
the updated Standard, and the reference to the equipment as ``wall-
mounted centralized mail'' receptacles rather than ``apartment house 
mail'' receptacles are made solely to reflect that the Standard applies 
to receptacles in a variety of residential and commercial buildings, 
and not only ``apartments.'' Adoption of the proposal will not result 
in any change in Postal Service policies concerning the purchase of 
this delivery equipment or the provision of delivery equipment for 
Postal Service customers previously in effect under STD-4B.
    Under the Postal Reorganization Act, the Postal Service is 
responsible for the maintenance of an efficient nationwide system for 
collecting, sorting, and delivering of mail. 39 U.S.C. 403(b)(1). 
Customer mail receptacles are an important consideration in this 
system. Receptacles should offer measurable protection for mail. This 
system benefits both senders and addressees who rely on the Postal 
Service to deliver intact mailpieces. In addition, the design of 
receptacles should not present any potential safety hazards to 
carriers. Finally, a well-designed receptacle can be accessed and 
serviced quickly by carriers, which helps to reduce Postal Service 
costs.
    As noted above, the current standard for mail receptacles in 
apartment and commercial buildings was adopted more than a quarter 
century ago, in 1975. The Postal Service and its customers have changed 
considerably during that time. In particular, there have been 
significant changes in the volume and type of mail received by many 
customers, with the average customer receiving more pieces on a daily 
basis and often larger-sized pieces. Postal Service statistics indicate 
that, since 1985, flat-sized mail volume has increased by 47 percent 
and parcel-shaped mail volume has increased 42 percent. Receptacles 
that were adequate to support the daily volume of mail in earlier years 
cannot easily hold many customers' mail today. As a result, delivery is 
less efficient since carriers must take extra time to prepare (i.e., 
fold or bend) the mail in order to insert it into customer receptacles. 
The mail may inadvertently be marred as a result of this effort. 
Accordingly, the proposed changes, as described more fully below, 
provide for larger receptacles than the minimum sizes in the current 
standard. The proposed sizes are intended as minimum standards. 
Buildings may provide larger sizes to accommodate the needs of their 
tenants, and it is expected that manufacturers will offer a wide range 
of products to meet customer needs
    In addition, the proposed changes generally require the provision 
of some larger shared receptacles, usually referred to as parcel 
lockers, based on the number of units in the building. These 
receptacles will not be assigned to specific residents, but will be 
used for the delivery of mail matter that, due to size or quantity, 
cannot be placed in the receptacle assigned to the addressee. This 
system obviates the need for the Postal Service to redeliver the mail 
or for the addressee to pick it up at a Postal Service retail facility. 
Postmasters shall consider excusing buildings from the need to provide 
parcel lockers if they have an agreement in place, as is the case with 
some commercial and residential buildings, for an alternative type of 
parcel delivery (e.g., concierge service or acceptance at the building 
management office), or if they provide receptacles for tenants that 
exceed the minimum size requirements and can accommodate parcels.
    Additionally, mail security has become a growing concern of the 
Postal Service. Statistics collected by the Postal Inspection Service 
demonstrate that theft of the mail is a growing problem. From 2000 to 
2002, Postal Inspection Service statistics indicate that reported 
attacks on wall-mounted boxes increased from 988 in FY 2000 to 2,819 in 
FY 2002. Moreover, it does not appear that these attacks are limited to 
a particular region of the country, but are occurring in different 
areas. In any event, even if the number of incidents had remained 
static, mail security would still be an area of concern since identity 
theft has become one of the motives for mail theft and this crime has 
potentially devastating financial impact on victims. The current 
generation of receptacles is not well suited to provide adequate 
physical security in this environment. According to a report issued by 
the Federal Trade Commission on September 3, 2003, a recent survey 
indicates that 27.3 million Americans have been victims of identity 
theft in the last 5 years, with 9.9 million victims in the last year 
alone. The reported cost of these crimes last year was $53 billion, 
affecting both businesses and individuals, with an average loss of 
approximately $5,000. Although stolen mail accounted for only 4 percent 
of these crimes, the Postal Service is seeking means to reduce the 
effectiveness of these attacks on our customers as much as possible. 
Accordingly, as explained below, the proposed revised Standard includes 
features to significantly improve the security of the receptacles.
    Based on these concerns, the Postal Service determined to review 
the existing Standard for wall-mounted receptacles to determine if 
improvements were possible. It determined to use a consensus process in 
developing the proposed revised Standard. In a consensus process, 
representatives of interests that would be substantially affected by a 
new rule meet as an advisory committee and negotiate among themselves 
and with the agency to reach a consensus on a proposed new rule.
    In this instance, the Postal Service retained the services of an 
independent, neutral third party to convene a Consensus Committee and 
facilitate discussions of committee members. Based on the convener's 
recommendation, the Postal Service invited interested parties that were 
expected to be substantially affected by the new rule to become 
Consensus Committee members. Further, committee members were 
responsible for representing other interested individuals and 
organizations that were not present at committee meetings and keeping 
them informed of the committee's proceedings.
    As part of the ground rules agreed to by all members of the 
Consensus Committee, the Postal Service agreed to use a recommendation 
by the committee as the basis for the proposed rule. In addition, each 
private member of the committee stipulated that, if it agreed to a 
recommendation by the committee, it would support that recommendation

[[Page 21457]]

and the proposed rule except to the extent that it does not reflect the 
recommendation. As part of its process, the Consensus Committee held 
several meetings that were open to the public. The committee has also 
agreed to meet, either in person or by teleconference, approximately 6 
and 12 months after publication of the Final Standard, to discuss any 
implementation or other issues that arise after adoption of the new 
Standard.
    In all, twenty parties were members of the committee. The Committee 
members were as follows: Academy Mailbox Company, Inc.; American Eagle 
Mailbox Manufacturing Company; American Locker Security Systems; 
Associated Building and Contractors, Inc.; Auth-Florence Manufacturing 
Corp.; Bommer Industries, Inc.; Building Owners and Managers 
Association International; Compx Security Products; Direct Marketing 
Association; HSS Industries; Jensen Industries; Magazine Publishers 
Association; National Association of Home Builders; National 
Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials; National 
Association of Realtors; National Multi Housing Council/National 
Apartment Association; Parcel Shippers Association; Postal Products 
Limited; Salsbury Industries; and the United States Postal Service.
    Each member of the committee, except one, signed the final 
agreement and agreed to the Final Committee Standard that is the basis 
for this proposed rule. The other committee member, National 
Association of Home Builders, although not a signatory to the 
agreement, stated that it was in substantial agreement with the 
requirements except with respect to parcel lockers. The proposed 
standard defines the new delivery equipment design requirements and 
other approval process requirements that must be met in order to 
receive design approval from the Postal Service. It is not intended to 
provide a private right of action or otherwise serve any nonpostal 
purposes.
    The following table compares requirements of the proposed standard, 
which shall be titled USPS-STD-4C, to the old standard, USPS-STD-4B, 
and the modified version of USPS-STD-4B, which shall be referred to as 
STD-4B+ (refer to the STD-4B+ description provided later in this 
section):

                         Requirements Comparison
------------------------------------------------------------------------
          USPS-STD-4C                 USPS-STD-4B         USPS-STD-4B+
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Minimum Std. Form Factor =  Horizontal Form Factor  Same as STD-4B.
 3''H x 12''W x 15''D.           = 5''H x 6''W x 15''D.
Vertical Form Factor            Vertical Form Factor =  Same as STD-4B.
 Eliminated.                     5''W x 6''D x 15H.
Parcel Lockers--Integral &      No Parcels Lockers....  Same as STD-4B.
 Stand Alone options with 1:10
 PL to Tenant Compartment
 Ratio.
Stringent and Comprehensive     Minimal Security        Improved Arrow
 Security Requirements for       Requirements.           lock
 Entire Receptacle.                                      compartment
                                                         security
                                                         requirement.
Standard Patron Lock Design...  Non-Standard Patron     Same as STD-4B.
                                 Locks.
Engineered for Indoor &         Engineered for Indoor   Same as STD-4B.
 Outdoor Use.                    Use Only.
Independent Laboratories to     USPS Performed All      Same as STD-4B.
 Perform Most Testing; USPS to   Testing.
 Perform Security Testing.
Quality Management System       None..................  Same as STD-4B.
 Provisions.
Enhanced Design Flexibility...  Nominal Design          Same as STD-4B.
                                 Flexibility.
Ergonomically Designed........  Ergonomics Not          Same as STD-4B.
                                 Factored in.
Americans with Disabilities     Install Instructions    Same as STD-4B.
 Act (ADA) Compliant.            Did Not Address ADA
                                 Requirements.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Although not included as part of the revised Standard, the 
Consensus Committee also considered other issues related to the 
implementation of the new Standard, if it is adopted. These concerns 
include the types of properties whose receptacles are subject to the 
new Standard, the dates by which affected buildings must comply with 
the new Standard, and the conditions under which existing buildings 
must replace receptacles with boxes meeting the new Standard. In 
considering these issues, particularly the latter two, the Postal 
Service and Committee members were mindful of conflicting concerns. 
That is, there is a need to weigh the benefits that would be realized 
from the installation of receptacles meeting the new Standard against 
the potential costs this would impose on building owners. Additionally, 
the effective date of the changes needs to be consistent with the 
ability of the construction industry to include the new receptacles in 
new structures.
    The committee did not attempt to conduct a formal cost-benefit 
analysis in considering these questions. In many instances, the 
assignment of precise amounts to the benefits and costs was considered 
a difficult task. Nevertheless, throughout the meetings, committee 
members identified a number of benefits and costs that would occur from 
the promulgation of Standard 4C. Building owners/managers, their 
tenants, persons and firms corresponding with the tenants, and the 
Postal Service are expected to realize benefits from the installation 
of Standard 4C receptacles. The receptacles will accommodate larger 
volumes of mail and different size pieces, and minimize consequences 
incurred by pieces during delivery to smaller receptacles. Tenants will 
have more flexibility in using the boxes to hold mail, particularly 
during days when they may be away. The receptacles will also provide 
increased mail security. They will more easily be served by carriers, 
increase service efficiencies, and facilitate earlier delivery. The new 
receptacles should reduce maintenance costs incurred by building 
owners, and may result in cleaner, less cluttered lobbies. The 
provision of larger receptacles and parcel lockers will allow tenants 
to avoid the need for trips to their Post OfficeTM to pick 
up mail. It may also allow some building owners to reduce office staff, 
particularly in buildings that provide such staff to receive parcels 
addressed to tenants.
    The costs are not necessarily limited to the costs of the 
receptacles and their installation, but could also include the costs of 
modifying buildings to accommodate the increased size of receptacles 
under STD-4C. These costs will be incurred by building owners and, 
indirectly, by their tenants. Although the committee did not develop a 
firm number for the cost of Standard 4C receptacles, two of the 
manufacturers on the committee estimated the cost would be 15 to 30 
percent more than STD-4B receptacles.
    Under the agreement reached by the Consensus Committee, the 
provisions of Standard 4C would apply to certain multiunit structures 
for residential and/or commercial use containing four or

[[Page 21458]]

more units. These include structures where the units are reached 
through a common entrance or entrances from the street. Structures 
where apartments or commercial units are accessed from individual 
entrances, such as townhouses, will not be subject to this Standard.
    Only new structures and existing structures undergoing substantial 
renovation, as defined below, would be required to install receptacles 
meeting the requirements of Standard 4C. In addition, any owners 
seeking new service or the resumption of mail service shall be required 
to install receptacles meeting Standard 4C (for example, a warehouse 
that converts to a residential or multiunit use that qualifies for 
centralized delivery). The new STD-4C would be implemented 2 years from 
its publication. This period will be measured by the date that an 
application for a permit for the structure is submitted with the 
appropriate government officials. That is, if the permit documents are 
submitted less than 2 years after the publication of the new Standard 
in the Federal Register, the building owners will be encouraged, but 
not required, to install receptacles meeting the Standard 4C 
specifications. Instead, these buildings may install receptacles 
meeting the requirements of Standard 4B for up to 180 days after 
publication of the Final Standard in the Federal Register, or the 
security-enhanced Standard 4B+ (described below). If a permit 
application is submitted 2 or more years after publication of the Final 
Standard in the Federal Register, the receptacles in the building must 
meet the Standard 4C specifications.
    The determination whether any building project is a ``substantial 
renovation'' requiring the installation of new STD-4C receptacles is 
based upon the nature of the project. Projects involving structural 
alterations in the mailbox area that create the opportunity to 
accommodate wall-mounted mail receptacles meeting the Standard 4C 
requirements may be considered substantial renovations. In contrast, 
routine, intermittent maintenance; painting; replacement, repair, or 
upgrades of carpets, floors or furniture; and replacement or repair of 
mail receptacles will not be considered ``substantial renovation'' when 
standing alone; a different conclusion may apply if such work is part 
of more substantial projects. For purposes of this determination, the 
term ``mailbox area'' shall be broadly construed and is not limited to 
the precise space in which mailboxes are located. Rather, it will 
include the aggregate area in which the mailboxes are housed, such as 
the lobby area of the building if that is where the boxes are located.
    A building project determined to be a ``substantial renovation'' 
under this standard will not invariably require the installation of 
STD-4C receptacles. Postmasters may grant exceptions in appropriate 
circumstances from all or portions of the Standard 4C requirements 
(e.g., a postmaster may grant an exception from the parcel locker 
requirement if the building management agrees to accept oversized mail 
and packages for tenants, while not excusing compliance with 
requirements for the new form factor in individual customer 
receptacles). Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, a 
finding that the changes required to install STD-4C receptacles will 
cause the building to violate local building codes or other laws (e.g., 
by restricting access to or egress from the building), will create 
significant safety hazards (e.g., disturbance of asbestos), or will 
impose unreasonable financial hardship on the owner. Building owners 
seeking an exception from the need to install STD-4C receptacles under 
these provisions should submit documentation substantiating the 
reason(s) for their request to the postmaster.
    Building owners that replace receptacles more than 2 years after 
the publication of the Standard 4C, but that are not required to meet 
the requirements of that Standard (i.e., because it is not a new or 
substantially renovated building or because the owner has received an 
exception from the Postal Service), will be required to install 
replacement receptacles that instead meet the requirements of a 
modified version of Standard 4B (referred to as Standard 4B+). In 
general, this modified version will maintain the size requirements of 
Standard 4B; however, more stringent security requirements will be 
required for certain critical features of the boxes.
    Receptacles that are not approved under the requirements of either 
Standard 4C or 4B+ may not be installed in buildings more than 180 days 
after the publication of Standard 4C, even though those receptacles 
were approved receptacles under Standard 4B. Receptacles meeting the 
requirements of Standard 4B+ may be installed in new buildings if the 
permit application has been submitted less than 2 years after 
publication of the Final Standard in the Federal Register.

Approval Process for Receptacles

    In order to be eligible for Postal Service carrier mail delivery, 
receptacles must be approved by the Postal Service. In order to receive 
approval under STD-4C, the manufacturer must submit the receptacle(s), 
along with the supporting materials listed in section 6 of the 
Standard, to the Postal Service at the following address: ATTN Delivery 
and Retail Systems, USPS Engineering, 8403 Lee Hwy, Merrifield VA 
22082-8101.
    In addition, manufacturers that are currently authorized to 
distribute delivery equipment under STD-4B will be required to upgrade 
the receptacles and seek recertification of those receptacles under 
STD-4B+. New manufacturers will not be permitted to submit STD-4B+ 
receptacles. If this proposal is adopted, the Postal Service will 
provide notice to manufacturers that manufacture receptacles that were 
approved under Standard 4B concerning the need for reapproval under 
Standard 4B+, the STD-4B+ specifications, and the timetable for 
obtaining recertification, which is shown below. Submissions should be 
sent to USPS Engineering at the above address.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Time after
             Event               Federal Register         Comment
                                 Final Rule Date
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of publication of USPS-    N/A..............
 STD-4C Federal Register final
 rule.
USPS Engineering notifies all   Up to 2 days.....  USPS to provide copy
 currently approved STD-4B                          of USPS-STD-4B,
 vendors that written                               Change 2, with
 notification required if                           letter to vendors;
 intending to submit STD-4B+                        this has STD-4B+
 boxes.                                             requirements.
Written response to USPS        Up to 60 Days....  To notify USPS of
 Engineering letter from all                        vendor's intent to
 currently approved STD-4B                          submit STD-4B+ boxes
 vendors only.                                      for approval.
USPS acceptance of STD-4B       Up to 180 Days...  No Arrow locks
 boxes for installs (new or                         installed in any STD-
 replacement).                                      4B receptacle by
                                                    USPS after this time
                                                    period.

[[Page 21459]]


Approval period for STD-4B+     Up to 365 Days...  USPS must reply to
 designs for currently                              each submittal
 approved STD-4B vendors only.                      within 45 days; no
                                                    limit on number of
                                                    submittals for any
                                                    vendor.
STD-4C receptacles only (no     After 2 years....  Based on date of
 STD-4B+) for all new                               permit, not
 construction permits and                           occupancy (start of
 qualifying renovations.                            mail delivery).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Postal service also proposes changing the Domestic Mail Manual 
(DMM) to ensure that manufacturers are aware of the specifications and 
procedures to obtain approval of their receptacles. Additional 
provisions would ensure that customers in structures in which delivery 
is to be provided through wall-mounted receptacles are aware of the 
need to provide approved equipment as a condition for such delivery.
    Although exempt from the notice and comment requirements of the 
Administrative Procedure Act [5 U.S.C. 553(b), (c)] regarding proposed 
rulemaking by 39 U.S.C. 410(a), the Postal Service invites comments on 
the following proposed revisions of the DMM incorporated by reference 
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), see 39 CFR part 111, and 
Standard USPS-4C.

List of Subjects in 39 CFR Part 111

    Administrative practice and procedure, Postal Service.

    Accordingly, as stated in the preamble, the Postal Service proposes 
to amend 39 CFR part 111 as follows:

PART 111--[AMENDED]

    1. The authority citation for 39 CFR part 111 continues to read as 
follows:

    Authority: 5 U.S.C 552 (a); 39 U.S.C. 101, 401, 403, 404, 414, 
416, 3001-3011, 3201-3219, 3403-3406, 3621, 3626, 5001.

    2. Revise the following sections of the Domestic Mail Manual (DMM) 
as follows:

Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)

* * * * *

D DEPOSIT, COLLECTION, AND DELIVERY

D000 Basic Information

* * * * *

D040 Delivery of Mail

D041 Customer Mail Receptacles

* * * * *
    [Add new section 3.0, as follows]
3.0 WALL-MOUNTED CENTRALIZED MAIL RECEPTACLES

 3.1 Manufacturer Requirements

    Manufacturers of wall-mounted centralized mail receptacles used for 
mail delivery must receive approval under the specifications and 
procedures set forth in USPS Standard 4. The specifications and other 
applicable information can be obtained by writing to USPS Engineering 
(see G043 for address) or wallmountedreceptacles@usps.gov.

3.2 Customer Requirements

    The installation of proper equipment is required for the provision 
of delivery service. The type of equipment must be approved by the 
Postal Service under 3.1 and must be appropriate for the structure. 
Customers should discuss the types of approved equipment permitted for 
their structures with their postmaster before purchasing and installing 
delivery equipment. For more information, contact 
wallmountedreceptacles@usps.gov.

    3. Revised USPS Standard 4 as follows:

U.S. POSTAL SERVICE STANDARD

WALL-MOUNTED CENTRALIZED MAIL RECEPTACLES

1. SCOPE
    1.1 Scope--This standard covers the design, testing, and acceptance 
of wall-mounted, centralized mail receptacles. The use of this standard 
is mandatory and the receptacles shall conform to this standard in 
order to be approved by the Postal ServiceTM.
    1.2 Suggested Design Types--Wall-mounted, centralized mail 
receptacles may be of the general types as shown in figures 1 through 
12. The depicted representations are only examples of possible 
compartment configurations. The intention of these figures is not to 
dictate specific designs and compartment arrangements, but to portray 
design examples that meet the requirements. In all cases, the units 
shall be designed for fully recessed wall mounting.
    Type I, Front Loader--A family of mail receptacles in a single 
column configuration with a single master door design, a minimum of 3 
and a maximum of 8 customer compartments, 1 mail collection compartment 
with separate outgoing mail slot and Arrow lock door, and 1 parcel 
compartment.
    Type II, Front Loader--A family of mail receptacles in a double 
column configuration with a double master door design, a minimum of 3 
and a maximum of 16 customer compartments, 1 mail collection 
compartment with separate outgoing mail slot and Arrow lock door, and 1 
or 2 parcel compartments.
    Type III, Front Loader--A family of mail receptacles in a double 
column configuration with a single master door design, a minimum of 3 
and a maximum of 16 customer compartments, 1 mail collection 
compartment with separate outgoing mail slot and Arrow lock door, and 1 
or 2 parcel compartments.
    Type IV, Rear Loader--A family of mail receptacles in a single 
column configuration with a rear access cover design, a minimum of 3 
and a maximum of 8 customer compartments, 1 mail collection 
compartment, and 1 parcel compartment.
    Type V, Rear Loader--A family of mail receptacles in a double 
column configuration with a rear access cover design, a minimum of 3 
and a maximum of 16 customer compartments, 1 mail collection 
compartment, and 1 or 2 parcel compartments.
    Type VI, Front Loader (No Parcel Compartment)--A family of mail 
receptacles in a single column configuration with a single master door 
design, a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 9 customer compartments, and 1 
mail collection compartment with separate outgoing mail slot and Arrow 
lock door.
    Type VII, Rear Loader (No Parcel Compartment)--A family of mail 
receptacles in a single column configuration with a rear access cover 
design, a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 9 customer compartments, and 1 
mail collection compartment.
    Type VIII, Front Loader (No Parcel Compartment)--A family of mail 
receptacles in a double column configuration with a double master door 
design, a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 19 customer compartments, and 1 
mail collection compartment with separate outgoing mail slot and Arrow 
lock door.
    Type IX, Rear Loader (No Parcel Compartment)--A family of mail

[[Page 21460]]

receptacles in a double column configuration with a rear access cover 
design, a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 19 customer compartments, and 1 
mail collection compartment.
    Type X, Front Loader, Parcel Only (No Master Door)--A family of 
parcel receptacles in a single column configuration without a master 
door design. These units are designed to provide separate parcel 
delivery capability for wall-mounted centralized mail receptacles 
installed without integral parcel compartments.
    Type XI, Front Loader, Parcel Only--A family of parcel receptacles 
in a single column configuration with a master door design. These units 
are designed to provide separate parcel delivery capability for wall-
mounted, centralized mail receptacles installed without integral parcel 
compartments.
    Type XII, Rear Loader, Parcel Only--A family of parcel receptacles 
in a single column configuration with a rear access cover design. These 
units are designed to provide separate parcel delivery capability for 
wall-mounted, centralized mail receptacles installed without integral 
parcel compartments.
    1.3 Approved Manufacturers--A list of approved manufacturers is 
available upon request from: USPS Engineering, Delivery and Retail 
Systems, 8403 Lee Highway, Merrifield VA 22082-8101.
    1.3.1 Interested Manufacturers--Manufacturers interested in selling 
wall-mounted, centralized mail receptacles to the public are required 
to obtain Postal Service approval. See section 6 for the application 
process.
2. APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS
    2.1 Specifications and Standards--Except where specifically noted, 
the specifications set forth herein shall apply to all receptacle 
designs.
    2.2 Government Documents--The following documents of the latest 
issue are incorporated by reference as part of this standard.

United States Postal Service

POM Postal Operations Manual

    Copies of the applicable sections of the Postal Operations Manual 
can be obtained from USPS Delivery and Retail, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., 
Washington, DC 20260-6200.

USPS-L-1172 Locks, Compartment, Customer--PSIN O910

    Copies of United States Postal Service specifications, standards 
and drawings may be obtained from USPS Delivery and Industrial 
Equipment CMC, Greensboro, NC 27498-0001.
    2.3 Non-Government Documents--The following documents of the latest 
issue are incorporated by reference as part of this standard.

STANDARDS

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

ASTM G85 Standard Practice for Modified Salt Spray (Fog) Testing
ASTM D968 Standard Test Methods for Abrasion Resistance of Organic 
Coatings by Falling Sand
ASTM D3801 Standard Test Methods for Measuring the Comparative Burning 
Characteristics of Solid Plastics in a Vertical Position

    Copies of the preceding documents may be obtained from the American 
Society for Testing and Materials, 100 Barr Harbor, West Conshohocken, 
PA 19428-2959. (http://www.astm.org)


Underwriters Laboratories

UL 771 Night Depositories (Rain Test Only)

    Copies of the preceding document can be obtained from Underwriters 
Laboratories Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, IL 60062-2096. 
(http://www.ul.com)

3. REQUIREMENTS
    3.1 General Design and Construction--The general configurations of 
the wall-mounted, centralized mail receptacles shall conform to the 
requirements as described in this standard. The receptacles shall be 
designed and constructed so that they can be serviced according to the 
intended method, front or rear access. The receptacles shall be 
designed to allow wall mounting in accordance with the installation 
requirements as stipulated in this document and the applicable sections 
of the current Postal Operations Manual (POM) as referenced in section 
2.2. The receptacle design shall preclude access from one compartment 
to another and it shall provide the required level of security for all 
receptacle contents and resistance to vandalism. The clearance between 
shelving sides and interior sides or rear walls shall prevent the 
passage of a 3\1/2\-inch (height) by 5-inch (length) by .007-inch thick 
card from one compartment to another.
    The design of all wall-mounted, centralized mail receptacles may be 
of the types specified in 1.2. The design of all receptacles shall be 
such that the unit can be installed either indoors or outdoors. Outdoor 
installations shall be in compliance with conditions as described in 
this document and the applicable sections of the POM without damage or 
deterioration to the materials of the receptacle or to its contents. 
Each unit shall be made of the exact materials, construction, coating, 
finish, etc., as shown on the manufacturer's drawings, which are 
identified and certified by the Postal Service. The overall height, 
width, and depth of any receptacle shall be such that all the 
applicable mounting requirements shall be met.
    All front-loading receptacles shall have fixed solid backs.
    3.2 Materials--Latitude shall be allowed in the materials used. The 
thickness, form, and mechanical and chemical properties of the material 
shall be adequate to meet the operational, structural, and performance 
requirements set forth in this standard. Materials must be compatible 
with each other; nontoxic and nonirritating to humans. Dissimilar 
metals shall be protected against galvanic corrosion. The material used 
in the fabrication of this equipment shall be new, suitable for the 
purpose used, free from all defects, and of the best commercial quality 
for this type of equipment.
    3.3 Colors, Coatings and Finishes--Exterior colors and finishes of 
the receptacles, in general, shall be optional with the manufacturer. 
Any finish or coating selected should meet all the requirements of this 
document.
    3.4 Mounting and Hardware--The hardware for attaching the 
receptacle to the wall shall be provided and packaged with the unit. 
All mounting hardware shall meet the corrosion resistance requirements 
of this document. Mounting hardware shall not protrude from any part of 
the unit to create a hazardous catch or bump point for customers or 
carriers. The mounting hardware shall be accessible for replacement in 
the event of damage to the unit and shall be hidden from public view 
while in service. The mounting technique and hardware selected shall 
allow the receptacle, when wall-mounted in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, to meet the pull requirements of section 
4.11.9.
    3.5 Customer and Parcel Compartment Doors--All compartment doors 
shall meet the common requirements listed in this section. In addition, 
each type of compartment doors shall meet any unique door requirements 
as described in 3.5.1 through 3.5.4 below.
    All compartments of front-loading receptacles shall have their own 
door and shall be hinged on the right. The door hinges shall be 
concealed or designed to prevent tampering. The doors shall be designed 
to open, close, and lock without binding or excessive play. All doors 
shall open a minimum of 90 degrees. The clearance between

[[Page 21461]]

door and door opening shall be evenly spaced, consistent in size, and 
minimized to preclude prying with such simple tools as knives, 
screwdrivers, thin metal strips, etc.
    Optional compartment heights, requiring doors or blanking plates 
larger than the minimum, shall be allowable, except as stated in 
section 3.5.3. However, no offered compartment height shall preclude 
any of the critical installation requirements, or any other 
requirement, from being met. In addition, no compartment size shall be 
offered as ``approved'' that is larger than any Postal Service-tested 
and approved size for that particular manufacturer.
    3.5.1 Customer Compartment Doors--Once opened, a customer door 
shall remain in the opened position until closed and locked. Each door 
shall permit the mounting of a lock as required by 3.10.1.
    3.5.2 Parcel Compartment Doors--The doors shall be spring loaded to 
return the doors to the fully closed position. The spring shall be of 
sufficient strength to close the door from any opened position. The 
strength of the spring shall not be excessive as to create the 
potential for injury or cause the doors to ``slam'' shut. Each door 
shall permit the mounting of locks as required by 3.10.2.
    3.5.3 Carrier Access (Arrow Lock) Door (Front Loader Designs)--The 
carrier access door shall have accommodations for mounting either Arrow 
lock shown in figure 13 in such a manner that the modified Arrow lock 
cylinder is flush with the front of the compartment door and the 
standard Arrow lock is slightly recessed. This door shall be designed 
to accommodate the mounting of the Arrow lock and the securing of a 
minimum-sized (3 inches high by 12 inches wide by 15 inches deep) 
compartment, which typically shall be used for retrieval of collection 
mail. For security reasons, under no circumstances shall this door be 
offered in any larger sizes. Once opened, the carrier access door shall 
remain in the opened position until closed and locked. This door shall 
not be numbered or lettered.
    3.5.4 Collection Mail Compartment Blanking Plate (Rear Loader 
Designs)--Rear loader receptacles shall have a blanking plate, sized to 
cover a minimum 3 inches high by 12 inches wide compartment, directly 
beneath the collection mail slot. This plate ensures a minimally 
acceptable compartment volume for the customer outgoing mail on rear 
loaders.
    3.6 Master Loading Door(s)
    3.6.1 Front Loader Designs--These units shall be equipped with a 
master loading door(s) on the same side as the individual compartment 
and parcel doors. The master loading door(s) shall allow access to all 
the unit's customer compartments and parcel compartments for the 
deposit of letter mail and parcels and the collection of customer 
outgoing mail. The master loading doors shall be designed not to 
interfere with the loading of customer and parcel compartments. These 
doors shall be designed so the withdrawal of mail through the 
individual customer doors allows the mail to slide smoothly over any 
parts of the master, customer, or parcel doors. The master loading 
door(s) shall be easy to open and close. For any double master loading 
door design, the doors shall be hinged on opposite sides and latched at 
the center of the unit. The door hinges shall be continuous or 
concealed and designed to prevent tampering. The doors shall lock in 
the open position by an automatic self-locking device until the 
delivery employee completes loading. The doors shall be held open at an 
angle of 90 degrees (+5,-0). The delivery employee shall be able to 
easily release the hold open device to close the door when loading has 
been completed. The door hold-open device shall withstand an inward or 
outward pull of 50 (+5, -0) pounds when applied to the master door edge 
farthest from the master door hinge and in a direction perpendicular to 
the door. (Note: For any nonparcel compartment design, disregard parcel 
compartment references.)
    The master loading door for any single door receptacle design and 
the right master loading door for any double master door design shall, 
as a minimum, have provisions and accommodations for a three-point 
(top, middle, bottom) latching mechanism, exclusive of the hinges, in 
conjunction with either a standard or modified Arrow lock to secure the 
door. Unless used solely as an actuator for locking pin(s), the Arrow 
lock shall lock the master loading door latch mechanism to ensure that 
the master loading doors are securely latched and that the latch 
mechanism cannot be moved. A limited loading shall be permitted on the 
end of the Arrow lock bolt only when the Arrow lock is used as an 
actuator to engage locking pins. In this case, the locking pin(s) shall 
secure the Arrow lock door to the master loading door frame. Only Arrow 
locks dimensioned in figure 13 shall be acceptable. The latching 
mechanism shall be rigid in design to avoid distortion. Locknuts shall 
be included for installing the Arrow lock. The master loading door(s) 
shall be easy to open, close, and lock. The carrier access shall not 
have pinch points or sharp edges. Clearance between the door and door 
opening shall be evenly spaced and consistent in size. The master 
loading doors shall be easily unlatched and opened using one hand. The 
latch mechanism may be mounted either on the unit frame or the master 
loading door. Clearance below the latch handle in either case shall be 
a minimum of 1.25 inches. When the carrier activates a master loading 
door latch mechanism mounted on the unit frame, the outer edge of the 
master loading door shall be automatically opened a minimum of 1 inch 
outside the door frame, enabling the carrier to easily grasp the door. 
When the latch mechanism is mounted on the unit frame, the handle must 
provide between 1.25 and 1.50 inches of grip length and a minimum of 1 
square inch of surface area. When the carrier activates a master 
loading door latch mounted on the door, the latch handle may be used to 
pull the door open. When the latch mechanism is mounted on the door, 
the handle must provide a minimum of 1.75 inches of grip length. In any 
double master door design, when the master loading door with the Arrow 
lock traps, or locks the left master loading door, a push-out device 
shall not be required if the carrier can easily grasp and open the left 
door.
    3.6.2 Rear Loader Designs--The master loading door for any rear 
loading units shall be in the form of a rear cover or door, which can 
be opened or removed and closed or replaced by the mail carrier, which 
will permit delivery of mail to each compartment. The cover or door 
shall prevent the mail from falling out between the cover or door and 
shelves, and be strong enough to prevent theft of the contents of 
adjoining receptacles by manually forcing the rear door or cover from 
the front of the receptacle through a compartment. The cover or door 
shall be capable of being latched or secured; locking is not required.
    3.7 Customer and Parcel Compartment Sizes--Customer and parcel 
compartment size requirements shall be as specified below.
    3.7.1 Customer Compartment Sizes--The minimum interior dimensions 
of each customer delivery compartment shall be 3 inches high by 12 
inches wide by 15 inches deep. Optional compartment heights, greater 
than the 3 inch minimum, shall be allowable, and mixed size customer 
compartments may be offered in any one unit. However, no combination 
shall preclude any of the critical installation requirements, or any 
other requirement, from being met. In

[[Page 21462]]

addition, no compartment size shall be offered as ``approved'' that is 
larger than any Postal Service-tested and approved size for that 
particular manufacturer.
    3.7.2 Parcel Compartment Sizes--The minimum interior dimensions of 
the parcel compartments shall be as follows:

(a) Standard Parcel Locker--15 inches high by 12 inches wide by 15 
inches deep
(b) Large Parcel Locker--18 inches high by 12 inches wide x 15 inches 
deep

    3.7.2.1 Parcel Locker to Customer Compartment Ratio--A minimum of 
one standard parcel locker shall be provided for every ten customer 
compartments. For installation sites with less then ten customer 
compartments, there shall be no mandatory parcel locker requirement, 
however, it shall be the intent of the Postal Service to strongly 
encourage the inclusion of a parcel locker.
    3.8 Collection Mail and Carrier Access (front-loading designs only) 
Compartment--All units shall have one reinforced collection mail 
compartment. A mail deposit slot 10.75 inches wide by .75 inches high 
shall be provided with a weather shield and a security shield to 
protect the deposited mail from the rain and snow and to prevent 
removal of the mail by fishing and pilfering techniques through the 
deposit slot. This compartment shall not be numbered or lettered. The 
phrase ``OUTGOING MAIL'' shall be marked on the deposit slot shield in 
black, recessed lettering. Marking shall be permanent and lettering 
size shall be \3/8\ to \1/2\ inch high.
    3.8.1 Front-Loading Designs--For front-loading designs, the front 
of the minimum-sized collection compartment shall consist of the 
carrier access (Arrow lock) door, as described in section 3.5.3, and 
the mail collection/deposit slot, which is framed by separate elements 
providing the weather and security shielding. The mail deposit slot 
frame design shall be hard mounted to the master door structure. 
Optional outgoing mail compartment heights shall be allowable. Hard-
mounted front blanking plates shall be used as required under the Arrow 
lock door for any larger collection mail compartment offerings. In 
addition, no offered outgoing mail compartment height shall preclude 
any of the critical installation requirements, or any other 
requirement, from being met, and no compartment size shall be offered 
that is larger than any fully tested size.
    3.8.2 Rear-Loading Designs--For rear-loading designs, the front of 
the minimum-sized collection compartment shall consist of a blanking 
plate hard mounted to the master door structure and the mail 
collection/deposit slot, which is framed by separate elements providing 
the weather and security shielding. Optional outgoing mail compartment 
heights, requiring blanking plates larger than the minimum, shall be 
allowable. However, no offered outgoing mail compartment height shall 
preclude any of the critical installation requirements, or any other 
requirement, from being met. In addition, no compartment size shall be 
offered that is larger than any fully tested size.
    3.9 Identification--Customer and compartment identifications shall 
be in the following manner.
    3.9.1 Customer Compartment Identification--Customer compartment 
doors shall be identified using either numbers or letters, optionally, 
in sequence from top to bottom. For any double master door designs, the 
numbers or letters shall start from the upper left corner compartment. 
In addition, they shall be \3/4\ to 1 inch high, sequential, black, and 
recessed. They may be engraved or stamped. Brushed aluminum decals with 
black numbering may be used, provided the decals are recessed in the 
door or a raised rib is provided around the decal to enhance the 
decal's location and limit removal. Decals shall be secured using a 
permanent type of adhesive. Numbers shall be made with one decal and 
not a combination of two single letter or number decals. In the 
horizontal direction, the centerline of the numbers shall be to the 
right of the customer lock (top lock) centerline. In the vertical 
direction, the customer lock and the numbers shall be the same 
centerline.
    3.9.2 Parcel Compartment Identification--Parcel compartment doors 
shall be provided with \3/4\ to 1 inch high, sequential, black, 
recessed numbers. Numbers may be engraved or stamped. Brushed aluminum 
decals with black numbering may be used, provided they are recessed in 
the door or a raised rib is provided around the decal to enhance decal 
location and limit removal. Decals shall be secured using a permanent 
type of adhesive. Numbers shall be made with one decal and not a 
combination of two single letter or number decals. Raised lettering 
shall not be acceptable. Parcel compartment doors shall be numbered 
(typically, 1P, 2P, etc). In the horizontal direction, the centerline 
of the letters shall be to the right of the customer lock (top lock) 
centerline. In the vertical direction, the customer lock and the 
numbers shall be the same centerline.
    3.9.3 Customer Identification--A minimum \1/2\ inch wide surface 
shall be located below the front of each delivery compartment shelf. 
The surface shall be concealed by the master door(s) and shall be 
visible only by the carrier once the master door(s) is opened. The 
surface provided shall be smooth and will allow for the optional 
attachment of self-adhesive labels. Alternatively, each compartment may 
be equipped with either a clasp or holder to accommodate a name card, 
or supplied with a designated flat surface for a permanent-type 
pressure-sensitive label for identifying the customer using the 
compartment. The holder or clasp shall be located on the frame above 
each compartment or inside of the compartment where the customer's name 
will be easily visible to the carrier when the box is opened for 
loading. The holder shall be of sufficient size to hold a name card of 
.75 inch by 2.50 inches or as large as space permits.
    3.10 Locks--Locks and cams shall be provided as specified below.
    3.10.1 Customer Compartment Locks--Each customer compartment door 
shall use a PSIN O910 lock, as specified in USPS-L-1172, or equivalent. 
The hole pattern for the lock is shown in figure 14. The hole shall be 
able to withstand 100 foot pounds of rotational torque, preventing the 
lock from being turned in the door allowing unauthorized entry into the 
compartment. The locks shall be oriented so that the locking cam 
rotates 90 degrees from the locked to the unlocked position. The key 
shall be removable only in the locked position. Individual customer 
locks shall be located in the compartment doors on the left side. Each 
lock shall be provided with three keys as specified in section 3.11.1. 
Key numbers shall not be placed on any exterior exposed surface. Cams 
shall be designed by the manufacturer to allow a secure grip of the 
lock to the compartment side wall. Each compartment lock shall be keyed 
differently in each receptacle. The locks must be securely fastened to 
the door to preclude punching out and twisting off. All customer 
compartment doors shall be locked for shipment.
    3.10.2 Parcel Compartment Locks--Each parcel compartment door shall 
be configured to accept a combination 910/Arrow lock arrangement. The 
910 lock shall serve as the customer access lock. Any parcel 
compartment provided as an integral part of a receptacle design shall 
have a 910 lock that is keyed differently than any customer compartment 
lock in the receptacle. The lock may itself provide the locking cam to 
secure the parcel door or it may be used as an

[[Page 21463]]

actuator in such a way as its cam moves locking pins into place to 
secure the parcel door. The locking pins would withstand the pry attack 
loads. The Arrow lock ``captures'' the 910 lock after its key has been 
inserted and the lock turned to allow the customer to remove their 
parcel. The Arrow lock and the 910 lock shall be located in a 
partitioned compartment and, for ease of maintenance reasons, shall not 
share the same compartment cover. The 910 lock cover shall be secured 
with standard hardware while the Arrow lock compartment cover shall be 
secured with tamper resistant screws. All parcel compartment doors 
shall be locked for shipment.
    3.10.3 Master Loading Door Lock (Front-Loading Designs)--Front-
loader receptacles shall be secured with an Arrow lock, in accordance 
with figure 13, to lock the master loading door(s) as defined in 
section 3.6.1. These units shall be configured so that the Arrow lock 
is always located directly beneath the collection mail slot. The mail 
slot and the Arrow lock door (carrier access door) shall share the same 
compartment but be separate items for security reasons. The Arrow lock 
shall be furnished and installed by the local postmaster or his 
representative. In addition, the Postal Service will provide dummy 
Arrow locks for test purposes upon request.
    3.11 Keys and Key Identification--All compartment keys for locks in 
accordance with USPS-L-1172 or equivalent shall be identified and 
perform in the following manner to allow for efficient control, 
security, and operation. No two compartments in the same receptacle 
shall be keyed alike. In addition, the full complement of required key 
codes shall be utilized in sequential order prior to repeating any 
individual key code within a production lot of receptacles. All keys 
shall have any burrs removed and shall move freely in and out of the 
lock. When the lock is installed and the key is inserted, the locks 
must be positioned so that the key is free to turn without binding or 
contacting/scraping any adjoining surface.
    3.11.1 Compartment Keys--Three keys shall be provided for each 
customer compartment and shall be delivered on a single key ring. All 
keys shall be temporarily identified for their respective compartment, 
bagged, and securely taped inside the collection compartment for 
shipping.
    3.11.2 Parcel Keys and Tags--Heavy-duty, rigid, clear plastic tags 
with card inserts containing instructions to the Postal Service 
customer on the use of the key, shall be furnished with each key for an 
individual parcel receptacle. The plastic tags shall be 1\1/2\ \1/16\ inches wide by 3 \1/16\ 
inches long by \3/16\ (+\1/16\, -0) inches thick, and shall have an 
opening at one end for a key ring. All holes or openings shall be 
reinforced. The tags shall also have a swivel device for key ring 
mounting. Heavy-duty rings for attaching the holder to the individual 
key shall be provided for parcel receptacle keys. The key shall not be 
easy to remove from the key ring. Each insert card shall be identified 
with a serial number that is the same as the mail receptacle unit's 
serial number. The cards shall be numbered (e.g., 1P, 2P, etc) to 
correspond with their respective parcel receptacles. Card insert 
lettering shall be legible and of sufficient size and contrast to be 
easily read. All keys shall move freely in and out of the lock. Three 
keys shall be provided for each receptacle lock, tagged with the clear 
plastic holder for their respective receptacle, and placed in the same 
bag with compartment keys.
    The card insert shall be as follows:
    Clear Plastic Holder YOU HAVE MAIL IN RECEPTACLE  *------
---- with card insert (side UNLOCK TOP LOCK AND REMOVE MAIL. A & B) KEY 
REMAINS IN LOCK.

    *NOTE: The manufacturer shall provide the numbers and names as 
specified above.

    3.12 Marking--For front-loading designs, there must be two 
inscriptions centered on the carrier access door: ``U.S. MAIL'' in a 
minimum of .50 inch high letters and ``APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER 
GENERAL'' in a minimum of .18 inch high letters. For rear-loading 
designs, these inscriptions must be centered on the blank panel of the 
outgoing mail compartment. These inscriptions shall be positioned in a 
vertical stack with ``U.S. Mail'' appearing above ``APPROVED BY THE 
POSTMASTER GENERAL.'' Markings must be permanent and may be 
accomplished by applying a decal, embossing on sheet metal, applying 
raised lettering on plastic, or using other methods that are suitable. 
In addition, a legible and permanently marked decal with ``USPS-STD-
4C,'' the manufacturer's name, address, date of manufacture (month and 
year), unit serial number, and model number or nomenclature must be 
affixed to the receptacle in a location that is readily visible to 
carriers.
    3.13 Assembly and Installation Instructions--A complete set of 
instructions including illustrations for assembling and installing the 
receptacle shall be prepared and provided with each receptacle. Both 
front- and rear-loading receptacles shall be mounted in accordance with 
the installation requirements as stipulated in this document and the 
applicable sections of the current Postal Operations Manual (POM) as 
referenced in section 2.2. The installation described shall be tested 
in accordance with the testing of section 4.11.9. These instructions 
shall completely convey all recess wall-mounting details, including 
equipment installation height restrictions as provided in the figures 
and the parcel locker ratio information. In addition, the instruction 
sheet shall carry a notice that the receptacle met all requirements of 
the Postal Service standard.
    3.14 Workmanship--Workmanship shall be of the highest quality 
throughout. All parts shall be clean, straight, accurately formed and 
assembled, properly fitted, and uniform in size and shape. Parts shall 
be free from delaminations, cracks, warpage, bulges, kinks, dents, 
porosity, voids, lumps, foreign matter, and other defects. Finished or 
coated surfaces shall be smooth and uniform, and free from soft areas, 
stain, chips, crazing, and cracks. Seams and connections shall be 
tight. Welding, riveting, and other joining shall be done in a neat and 
approved manner. The receptacle shall be free from sharp edges, sharp 
corners, protruding rivets, and operational features, which might 
injure or hamper the carrier or customer.
    3.15 Bolted Connections--Bolts or screws that can be removed in any 
exposed area shall not be used for joining parts of the receptacle. 
Sheet metal screws shall not be used in the assembly of the receptacle.
    3.16 Riveted Joints--Hollow-type eyelets or grommets shall not be 
used in the fabrication of the receptacle.
    3.17 Welding--Any type of weld (electric-arc, resistance, gas, 
etc.) may be used in the fabrication of the receptacle, providing it 
produces a satisfactory and safe joint and is performed in accordance 
with applicable best commercial practices.
    3.18 Fabrication and Assembly--All components and parts shall be 
fabricated and assembled to be permanently square and rigid to preclude 
binding, warping, or misalignment, which may reduce or prevent proper 
equipment operation or maintenance or may result in a premature failure 
of any part or component.
4. TESTING REQUIREMENTS
    4.1 Testing Requirements--Units will be subjected to all applicable 
testing described herein. A unit that fails to pass any test will be 
rejected.

[[Page 21464]]

Testing will be conducted in sequence as listed herein and in table 
III.
    4.2 Capacity
    4.2.1 Customer Compartments--Customer compartments must meet 
minimum capacity requirements tested by insertion and removal of a 
standard test gauge which measures 2-15/16 inches high by 11-15/16 
inches wide by 14-15/16 inches deep. The test gauge will be inserted 
with its 2-15/16-inch dimension aligned in the vertical axis 
(perpendicular to the compartment floor). The gauge must be capable of 
easy insertion and removal, and while inserted, allow for the door(s) 
to be completely closed without interference.
    4.2.2 Collection Mail Compartment--The collection mail compartment 
must meet minimum capacity requirements tested by insertion through the 
mail deposit slot of 48 standard letters (4.00 inches high by 9.50 
inches long by .12 inch thick) and 4 Express Mail or Priority Mail 
envelopes (9.50 inches high by 12.50 inches long by .50 inch thick). 
Letter and envelope thicknesses shall be achieved by inserting 8.5 inch 
by 11 inch paper.
    4.2.3 Parcel Compartment--Parcel compartments must meet minimum 
capacity requirements tested by insertion and removal of a standard 
test gauge which measures 14-15/16 inches high by 11-15/16 inches wide 
by 14-15/16 inches deep. The test gauge will be inserted with a 14-15/
16 inch dimension aligned on the vertical axis (perpendicular to the 
compartment floor). The gauge must be capable of easy insertion and 
removal; and while inserted, allow for the door(s) to be completely 
closed without interference.
    4.3 Operational Requirements--The carrier access (Arrow lock) door, 
customer doors, parcel doors, master loading door(s), and hold open 
device(s) must be capable of operating 10,000 normal operating cycles 
(1 cycle = open/close) at room temperature, continuously and correctly, 
without any failures such as breakage of parts. The cycle rate for 
carrier access (Arrow lock), customer and parcel doors shall not exceed 
3 seconds per cycle. The cycle rate for the master loading door(s) and 
hold open device(s) shall not exceed 10 seconds per cycle. Testing may 
be performed either manually or by means of an automated, mechanically 
driven test fixture that replicates a manual operation.
    4.4 Water-Tightness--A rain test in accordance with UL 771, section 
47.7 shall be performed to determine a receptacle's ability to protect 
mail from water. Prior to the test, the unit shall be prepared by 
shielding the body of the receptacle so that only the master door, 
customer doors, and front frame elements shall be directly exposed to 
rain during the test. The rain test shall be operated for a period of 
15 minutes on the customer compartment door (front) side of the mail 
receptacle. At the conclusion of the test, the outside of the unit is 
wiped dry and all doors are opened. The inside of the compartments must 
contain no water other than that produced by high moisture 
condensation.
    4.5 Salt Fog Resistance--A salt fog test shall be conducted in 
accordance with method A5 of ASTM G85, Standard Practice for Modified 
Salt Spray (Fog) Testing. The salt test shall be operated for 25 
continuous cycles with each cycle consisting of 1-hour fog and 1-hour 
dry-off. The unit shall be tested in a finished condition, including 
all protective coating, paint, and mounting hardware and shall be 
thoroughly washed when submitted to remove all oil, grease, and other 
nonpermanent coatings. No part of the receptacle may show finish 
corrosion, blistering, or peeling, or other destructive reaction upon 
conclusion of test. Corrosion is defined as any form of property change 
such as rust, oxidation, color changes, perforation, accelerated 
erosion, or disintegration. The buildup of salt deposits upon the 
surface shall not be cause for rejection. However, any corrosion, paint 
blistering, or paint peeling is cause for rejection. It is also valid 
for units made of plastic that employ metal hardware.
    4.6 Abrasion Resistance--The unit's coating/finish shall be tested 
for resistance to abrasion in accordance with method A of ASTM D968. 
The rate of sand flow shall be 2 liters of sand in 22 3 seconds. The receptacle will have failed the sand 
abrasion test if less than 15 liters of sand penetrates its coating or 
if less than 75 liters of sand penetrates its plating. This test is 
applicable to metal receptacle designs only.
    4.7 Temperature Stress Test--The unit under test shall be placed in 
a cold chamber at -40[deg] Fahrenheit (F) for 24 hours. The chamber 
shall first be stabilized at the test temperature. After remaining in 
the -40[deg]F environment for the 24-hour period, the unit shall be 
quickly removed from the cold chamber into room ambient and tested for 
normal operation. The removal from the chamber and the testing for 
normal operation shall be accomplished in less than 3 minutes. The room 
ambient shall be between 65[deg] and 75[deg] F. Normal operation is 
defined as operation required and defined by this document. The unit 
under test shall undergo a similar temperature test, as described 
above, at a temperature of 140[deg] F.
    4.8 Structural Rigidity Requirements--Pull loads of the specified 
magnitudes (see table II) shall be slowly applied at any point of the 
specific item of the unit under test. These forces shall be held for a 
time not to exceed one minute and then released. Supplemental bracing 
may be used to isolate the loading on the specific item to be tested. 
After the release of the load, the permanent deformation caused by the 
forces shall be measured. If the deformation exceeds the limit 
specified in table II, the unit under test has failed to meet the 
structural rigidity requirement.

            Table II.--Pull Load Permanent Deformation Limits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Permanent
                  Item                      deformation      Pull load
                                             (inches)        (pounds)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carrier access (Arrow lock) door (front-           \1/8\            1400
 loading designs).......................
Collection comp. front blanking plate              \1/8\            1400
 (rear-loading designs).................
Collection mail slot frame (all designs            \1/8\            1400
 except parcel-only)....................
Master door(s) at hinge side--top &                \1/8\            1000
 bottom (front-loading designs).........
Master door at center along Arrow lock             \1/8\            1000
 side--(front-loading designs)..........
Rear cover (rear-loading designs).......           \1/8\             250
Customer compartment door (all designs             \1/8\             250
 except parcel-only)....................
Parcel compartment door (all designs               \1/8\             250
 except nonparcel versions).............
Master door hold-open device (front-                   0              50
 loading designs).......................
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 21465]]

    4.9 Impact Test--The front exposed surfaces of the receptacles and 
any coatings applied to them shall not be cracked, chipped, broken, 
dented (more than 1/16 inch in depth), or visibly permanently deformed 
by a hard steel 2-pound ball with a 1/2-inch spherical radius dropped 
from a height of 6 inches.
    4.10 Flammability--A flammability test shall be conducted on all 
potentially flammable materials used in the unit. The test shall be 
conducted in accordance with ASTM D3801. The ASTM D3801 standard flame 
test shall achieve a rating of V-1 or better. (Note: It is the building 
owner's responsibility to make sure that the installation of any 
receptacle is in compliance with local building and fire codes.)
    4.11 Security Test--Receptacles shall be tested, as described 
below, for resistance to tampering and unauthorized entry through the 
use of tools such as screwdrivers, flat plates, knives, pry bars, vise 
grips, pliers, chisels, and punches for a period not to exceed 3 
minutes for each feature tested. No pry tools shall exceed 18 inches in 
length. Because of the critical nature of the master-loading door and 
Arrow lock (outgoing mail) compartment, a hammer shall be used in 
tandem with the other tools during tests of these items. The head 
weight of any hammer used shall not exceed 3 pounds. In addition, the 
Arrow lock compartment door will also be subjected to a 2-minute torch 
test using commonly available microtorch kits.
    4.11.1 Customer Compartment and Parcel Compartment Customer Access 
Locks--Customer lock plugs shall withstand a minimum of 70 pounds of 
force slowly applied inward. Load forces shall be applied to the key 
entrance side of the lock. The lock and door shall remain closed and 
locked after each test. In addition, the locks shall be tested using 
vise grips and other tools in an attempt to turn the lock with the 
customer or parcel door in the closed position. These tests shall not 
allow access to the customer or parcel compartment.
    4.11.2 Customer Compartment Doors--Gaps and seams around the 
perimeter of the customer compartment doors shall be tested using pry 
tools listed in 4.11 for a period not to exceed 3 minutes to ensure 
that access to the compartment cannot be gained. The lock-mounting hole 
in the door shall be able to withstand 100 foot-pounds of torque 
applied in the plane of the door, preventing the lock from being turned 
in the door allowing unauthorized entry into the compartment.
    4.11.3 Parcel Compartment Door--Gaps and seams around the perimeter 
of the parcel compartment door(s) shall be tested using pry tools 
listed in 4.11 for a period not to exceed 3 minutes to ensure that 
access to the compartment cannot be gained.
    4.11.4 Master Loading Door (Front-Loading Designs Only)--Seams 
around the perimeter of the master loading door(s) shall not allow 
access to the interior of the receptacle when tested using pry tools 
listed in 4.11 for a period not to exceed 3 minutes. A 3-pound hammer 
shall be used for a time period not to exceed 1 minute in tandem with 
these other tools during the tests of the master-loading door(s).
    4.11.5 Arrow Lock Compartment Door (Front-Loading Designs Only)--
The Arrow lock compartment door shall be tested using the pry tools in 
4.11 for a period not to exceed 3 minutes. A 3-pound hammer shall be 
used for a time period not to exceed 1 minute in tandem with these 
other tools during the tests of various features of the Arrow lock 
compartment. Seams and gaps around the perimeter of the Arrow lock 
compartment door and the structural integrity of the door itself shall 
not allow access to the receptacle under test conditions. In addition, 
the Arrow lock compartment door will also be subjected to a 2-minute 
torch test using commonly available microtorch kits. (Note: These tests 
shall not be performed on the same test door.)
    4.11.6 Outgoing Mail Slot--The mail slot and security shield design 
shall be tested using the pry tools in 4.11 for a period not to exceed 
3 minutes. A 3-pound hammer shall be used for a time period not to 
exceed 1 minute in tandem with these other tools during the tests of 
the seams and gaps around the perimeter of the mail slot. In addition, 
as part of the test, a pry bar not exceeding 18 inches in length shall 
be inserted into the mail slot in an attempt to gain access to 
deposited mail in the compartment.
    4.11.7 Outgoing Mail Compartment Front-Blanking Plate--Gaps and 
seams around the perimeter of any outgoing mail compartment front-
blanking plate shall be tested using pry tools listed in 4.11 for a 
period not to exceed 3 minutes to ensure that access to the compartment 
cannot be gained. A 3-pound hammer shall be used for a time period not 
to exceed 1 minute in tandem with these other tools during the tests of 
the seams and gaps around the perimeter of this item.
    4.11.8 Rear Door/Panel (Rear-Loading Designs Only)--The rear cover 
shall be tested for a period not to exceed 3 minutes by attempting to 
force it to unseat. No access to the backside of the unit or to any 
adjacent compartments shall be gained as a result of this test. All 
customer compartment and parcel locker doors shall be open for this 
test.
    4.11.9 Receptacle Installation (All Designs)--Receptacles will be 
installed in a representative wall fixture in accordance with the 
installation instructions provided by the manufacturer. The 
receptacle's mounting hardware will be subjected to a uniform pull load 
of 500 pounds. This load will be applied by placing a bolster plate to 
the backside area of the receptacle and attaching it to one or more 
cables that are passed through drill holes added to the rear wall of 
the actual receptacle. Any front doors of customer compartments in 
alignment with the cables may be opened or removed for the test. All 
bolster plate cables will be tied together at a minimum distance of 3 
feet from the front surface of the unit with a single cable fitted with 
a shackle, hook, etc. A maximum horizontal pull load of 500 pounds will 
be applied and the receptacle will have met this requirement if its 
mounting hardware is not loosened from its wall mount. Supplemental 
bracing of the wall may be used to isolate the loading on the 
receptacle's mounting hardware.
5. QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PROVISIONS
    5.1 Quality System--The approved source shall ensure and be able to 
substantiate that manufactured units conform to requirements and match 
the approved design.
    5.2 Inspection--The USPS reserves the right to inspect units for 
conformance at any stage of manufacture. Inspection by the USPS does 
not relieve the approved source of the responsibility to provide 
conforming product. The USPS, may, at its discretion, revoke the 
approval status of any product that does not meet the requirements of 
this standard.
    5.3 System--The approved source shall use a documented quality 
management system acceptable to the USPS. The USPS has the right to 
evaluate the acceptability and effectiveness of the approved source's 
quality management system prior to approval, and during tenure as an 
approved source. As a minimum, the quality management system shall 
include controls and record keeping in the following areas:
    5.3.1 Document Control--Documents used in the manufacture of 
product shall be controlled. The control process for documents shall 
ensure the following:

[[Page 21466]]

     Documents are identified, reviewed, and approved 
prior to use.
     Revision status is identified.
     Documents of external origin are identified and 
controlled.
    5.3.2 Supplier Oversight--A documented process shall ensure the 
following:
     Material requirements and specifications are 
clearly described in procurement documents.
     Inspection or other verification methods are 
established and implemented for validation of purchased materials.
    5.3.3 Inspection and Testing--The approved source shall monitor and 
verify that product characteristics match approved design. This 
activity shall be carried out at appropriate stages of manufacture to 
ensure that only acceptable products are delivered.
    5.3.4 Control of Nonconforming Product--The control method and 
disposition process shall be defined and ensure that any product or 
material that does not conform to the approved design is identified and 
controlled to prevent its unintended use or delivery.
    5.3.5 Control of Inspection, Measuring, and Test Equipment--The 
approved source shall ensure that all equipment used to verify product 
conformance is controlled, identified, and calibrated at prescribed 
intervals traceable to nationally recognized standards in accordance 
with documented procedures.
    5.3.6 Corrective Action--The approved source shall maintain a 
documented complaint process. This process shall ensure that all 
complaints are reviewed and that appropriate action is taken to 
determine cause and prevent reoccurrence. Action shall be taken in a 
timely manner and be based on the severity of the nonconformance.


    Note: It is recognized that each approved source functions 
individually and consequently, the quality system of each approved 
source may differ in the specific methods of accomplishment. It is 
not the intent of this standard to attempt to standardize these 
systems, but to present the basic functional concepts that when 
conscientiously implemented will provide assurance that the approved 
source's product meets the requirements and fully matches the 
approved design.


    In addition to outlining the approved source's approach to quality, 
the documentation should specify the methodology used to accomplish the 
interlinked processes and describe how they are controlled. The 
approved source shall submit its quality documentation to the Postal 
Service for review along with the preliminary design review.
    5.3.7 Documentation Retention--All of the approved source's 
documentation pertaining to the approved product shall be kept for a 
minimum of three (3) years after shipment of product.
    5.3.8 Documentation Submittal--The approved source shall submit a 
copy of their quality system documentation relevant to the manufacture 
of wall-mounted, centralized mail receptacles for review as requested 
during the approval process and tenure as an approved source.
6. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
    6.1 Application Requirements--All correspondence and inquiries 
shall be directed to the address in 1.3. The application process 
consists of the following:
    6.1.1 Preliminary Review--Manufacturers must first satisfy 
requirements of a preliminary review prior to submitting samples of any 
receptacles. The preliminary review consists of a review of the 
manufacturer's conceptual design drawings for each receptacle type for 
which the manufacturer is seeking approval. Computer-generated drawings 
are preferred, but hand-drawn sketches are acceptable provided they 
adequately depict the important design aspects of the proposed 
receptacle design. In particular, drawings should include overall unit 
with standard and optional compartment size information plus details on 
the design of such critical features as the carrier access, customer, 
parcel, and master load door(s) designs, hinge designs, all lock-
mounting techniques and cam engagements, material selections, the 3-
point latching and handle designs, the wall-mounting concept, and 
outgoing mail slot design. If drawings show that the proposed 
receptacle design appears likely to comply with the requirements of 
this standard, manufacturers will be notified in writing and may then 
continue with the application requirements described in 6.1.2. Do NOT 
submit any sample units to the USPS prior to complying with the 
requirements of 6.1.2. Notification that a manufacturer's drawings 
satisfy the requirements of the preliminary review does NOT constitute 
USPS approval of a design, and shall not be relied upon as an assurance 
that a design will ultimately be approved.
    6.1.2 Independent Lab Testing--Upon receiving written notification 
from the USPS that their design(s) satisfies requirements of the 
preliminary review, manufacturers shall at their own expense submit at 
least one representative sample of the highest total-compartment 
version of each type of apartment receptacle for which the vendor seeks 
USPS approval to an independent laboratory for testing along with a 
copy of the preliminary review letter from the USPS. If the vendor 
plans to offer optional compartment sizes, the submitted samples shall 
include at least one of the largest compartment size. All tests shall 
be performed by an approved independent test lab, except for the 
security tests which shall be performed by the Postal Service. See 
Appendix A for a list of USPS-approved independent test labs.
    6.1.3 Final Review--Manufacturers shall submit two representative 
samples of the largest (typically, the highest total-compartment) 
version to the USPS for security testing, final review, and approval. 
If the vendor plans to offer optional compartment sizes, the submitted 
samples shall include at least one of the largest compartment size. The 
sample shall be accompanied with a certificate of compliance and a copy 
of the laboratory test results (see 6.1.3.3). Receptacles submitted to 
the USPS (see 1.3) for final evaluation must be identical in every way 
to the receptacles to be marketed, and must be marked as specified in 
3.11. Manufacturers may be subject to a verification of their quality 
system prior to approval. This may consist of a review of the 
manufacturer's quality manual (see 6.1.3.4) and an onsite quality 
system evaluation (see 5.2).
    6.1.3.1 Installation Instructions--Manufacturers shall furnish a 
written copy of their installation instructions for review. These 
instructions shall contain all information as detailed in section 3.13.
    6.1.3.2 Documentation--Units submitted for approval shall be 
accompanied by two complete sets of manufacturing drawings consisting 
of black on white prints (blueprints or sepia are unacceptable). The 
drawings shall be dated and signed by a manufacturer's 
representative(s). The drawings must completely document and represent 
the design of the unit tested. If other versions of the approved type 
unit are to be offered, the drawings must include the unique or 
differing design items of these versions. The drawings must include 
sufficient details to allow the USPS to inspect all materials, 
construction methods, processes, coatings, treatments, finishes 
(including paint types), control specifications, parts, and assemblies 
used in the construction of the unit. Additionally, the drawings must 
fully describe any purchased materials, components, and hardware 
including their respective finishes. The USPS may

[[Page 21467]]

request individual piece parts to verify drawings.
    6.1.3.3 Certification of Compliance & Test Results--Manufacturers 
shall furnish a written certificate of compliance indicating that their 
design fully complies with the requirements of this standard. In 
addition, the manufacturer shall submit the lab's original report which 
clearly shows results of each test conducted (see Table IV). The 
manufacturer bears all responsibility for their unit(s) meeting these 
requirements, and the USPS reserves the right to retest any and all 
units submitted including those which are available to the general 
public.

                                          Table IV.--Test Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Test                       Requirement            Reference          Industry specifications
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Capacity.........................  Insertion of test gauges.             4.2  ..................................
Operational Requirements.........  10,000 cycles............             4.3  ..................................
Water-Tightness..................  No appreciable moisture..             4.4  UL 771, section 47.7.
Salt Fog Resistance..............  25 cycles................             4.5  ASTM G85.
Abrasion Resistance..............  75 liters................             4.6  ASTM D968.
Temperature Stress Test..........  Shall function between -              4.7
                                    40[deg] F and 140[deg] F.
Structural Rigidity Requirements.  Refer to Table I for                  4.8  ..................................
                                    loads and points,
                                    maximum \1/8\ inch
                                    permanent deformation.
Impact...........................  2 lbs. dropped from 6                 4.9  ..................................
                                    inches.
Flammability.....................  V-1 or better............  ..............  ASTM D 3801.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    6.1.3.4 Quality Policy Manual--Manufacturer shall submit its 
quality policy manual to the address listed in section 1.3.
7. APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL
    7.1 Disapproval--Written notification, including reasons for 
disapproval, will be sent to the manufacturer within 30 days of 
completion of the final review of all submitted units. All 
correspondence and inquiries shall be directed to the address listed in 
1.3
    7.1.1 Disapproved Receptacles--Units disapproved will be disposed 
of in 30 calendar days from the date of the written notification of 
disapproval or returned to the manufacturer, if requested, provided the 
manufacturer pays shipping costs.
    7.2 Approval--One set of manufacturing drawings with written 
notification of approval will be returned to the manufacturer. The 
drawings will be stamped and identified as representing each unit.
    7.2.1 Approved Receptacles--Units that are approved will be 
retained by the USPS.
    7.2.2. Rescission--Manufacturer's production units shall be 
constructed in accordance with the USPS-certified drawings and the 
provisions of this specification and be of the same materials, 
construction, coating, workmanship, finish, etc., as the approved 
units. The USPS reserves the right at any time to examine and retest 
units obtained either in the general marketplace or from the 
manufacturer. If the USPS determines that a receptacle model is not in 
compliance with this standard or is out of conformance with approved 
drawings, the USPS may, at its discretion, rescind approval of the 
receptacle as follows:
    7.2.2.1 Written Notification--The USPS shall provide written 
notification to the manufacturer that a receptacle is not in compliance 
with this standard or is out of conformance with approved drawings. 
This notification shall include the specific reasons that the unit is 
noncompliant or out of conformance and shall be sent via Registered 
MailTM.
    7.2.2.1.1 Health and Safety--If the USPS determines that the 
noncompliance or nonconformity constitutes a danger to the health or 
safety of customers and/or letter carriers, the USPS may, at its 
discretion, immediately rescind approval of the unit. In addition, the 
USPS may, at its discretion, order that production of the receptacle 
cease immediately and that any existing inventory not be sold for 
receipt of U.S. mail.
    7.2.2.2 Manufacturer's Response--In all cases of noncompliance or 
nonconformity other than those determined to constitute a danger to the 
health or safety of customers and/or letter carriers, the manufacturer 
shall confer with the USPS and shall submit one sample of a corrected 
receptacle to the USPS for approval no later than 45 calendar days 
after receipt of the notification described in 7.2.2.1. Failure to 
confer or submit a corrected receptacle within the prescribed period 
shall constitute grounds for immediate rescission.
    7.2.2.3 Second Written Notification--The USPS shall respond to the 
manufacturer in writing, via Registered Mail, no later than 30 calendar 
days after receipt of the corrected receptacle with a determination of 
whether the manufacturer's submission is accepted or rejected and with 
specific reasons for the determination.
    7.2.2.4 Manufacturer's Second Response--If the USPS rejects the 
corrected receptacle, the manufacturer may submit a second sample of 
the corrected receptacle to the USPS for approval no later than 45 
calendar days after receipt of the notification described in 7.2.2.3. 
Failure to confer or submit a corrected receptacle within the 
prescribed period shall constitute grounds for immediate rescission.
    7.2.2.5 Final USPS Rescission Notification--The USPS shall provide 
a final response to the manufacturer in writing no later than 30 
calendar days after receipt of the second sample corrected receptacle 
with a determination of whether the manufacturer's submission is 
accepted or rejected and with specific reasons for the determination. 
If the second submission is rejected, the USPS may, at its discretion, 
rescind approval of the receptacle. In addition, the USPS may, at its 
discretion, order that production of the receptacle cease immediately, 
and that any existing inventory not be sold or used for receipt of U.S. 
mail. If the USPS rescinds approval, the manufacturer is not prohibited 
from applying for a new approval pursuant to the provisions of section 
6.
    7.2.3 Revisions, Product or Drawings--Changes that affect the form, 
fit, and/or function (i.e., dimensions, material, finish, etc.) of 
approved products or drawings shall not be made without written USPS 
approval. Any proposed changes shall be submitted with the affected 
documentation reflecting the changes (including a notation in the 
revision area), and a written explanation of the changes. One unit, 
incorporating the changes, may be required to be resubmitted for 
testing and evaluation for approval.

[[Page 21468]]

    7.2.3.1 Corporate or Organizational Changes--If any substantive 
part of the approved manufacturer's structure changes from what existed 
when the manufacturer became approved, the manufacturer shall promptly 
notify the USPS and will be subject to a reevaluation of their approved 
product(s) and/or quality system. Examples of substantive structural 
changes include the following: change in ownership, executive or 
quality management; major change in quality policy or procedures; 
relocation of manufacturing facilities; major equipment or 
manufacturing process change (e.g., outsourcing vs. inplant 
fabrication); etc. Notification of such changes must be sent to the 
address in section 1.3.

BILLING CODE 7710-12-P

[[Page 21469]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.000


[[Page 21470]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.001


[[Page 21471]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.002


[[Page 21472]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.003


[[Page 21473]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.004


[[Page 21474]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.005


[[Page 21475]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.006


[[Page 21476]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.007


[[Page 21477]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.008


[[Page 21478]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.009


[[Page 21479]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.010


[[Page 21480]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.011


[[Page 21481]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.012


[[Page 21482]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP21AP04.013

Appendix A--USPS-Approved Independent Test Laboratories

    (1) ACTS Test Labs, Contact: Dennis Maclaughlin, Phone: 716-505-
3547, Fax: 716-505-3301, 100 Northpointe Parkway, Buffalo, NY 14228-
1884.
    (2) The Coatings Lab, Contact: Tom Schwerdt, Phone: 713-981-
9368, Fax: 713-776-9634, 10175 Harwin Drive, Suite 110, Houston, TX 
77036.
    (3) Ithaca Materials Research & Testing, Inc. (IMR), Contact: 
Jeff Zerilli, Vice President, Phone: 607-533-7000, Lansing Business 
and Technology Park, 31 Woodsedge Drive, Lansing, NY 14882.
    (4) Independent Test Laboratories, Inc., Contact: Robet Bouvier, 
Phone: 800-962-Test, Fax: 714-641-3836, 1127B Baker Street, Costa 
Mesa, CA 92626.
    (5) Midwest Testing Laboratories, Inc., Contact: Cherie 
Ulatowski, Phone: 248-689-9262, Fax: 248-689-7637, 1072 Wheaton, 
Troy, MI 48083.

    Note: Additional test laboratories may be added provided they 
satisfy USPS certification criteria. Interested laboratories should 
contact: USPS Engineering, Test Evaluation and Quality, 8403 Lee 
Highway, Merrifield, VA 22082-8101.


Neva R. Watson,
Attorney, Legislative.

[FR Doc. 04-8972 Filed 4-20-04; 8:45 am]

BILLING CODE 7710-12-C
