
   JOHN MUSACCHIA, PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 90-513

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1990

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Second Circuit

   Brief For The United States

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Questions Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-28a) is reported
at 900 F.2d 493.  The opinion of the district court is reported at 696
F. Supp. 1548.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on March 21, 1990,
and a petition for rehearing was denied on May 24, 1990.  Pet. App.
29a-30a.  On August 15, 1990, Justice Marshall extended the time for
filing a petition for a writ of certiorari to September 21, 1990, and
the petition was filed on that date.  The jurisdiction of this Court
is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                          QUESTIONS PRESENTED

   1. Whether, under 26 U.S.C. 6531, the statute of limitations
applicable to a prosecution for aiding and abetting tax evasion, in
violation of 26 U.S.C. 7201, is six years.

   2. Whether this Court's decision in Gomez v. United States, 109 S.
Ct. 2237 (1989), requires reversal of petitioner's conviction even
though he did not object to the magistrate's conducting the jury
selection in this case.

                               STATEMENT

   Following a jury trial in the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of New York, petitioner was convicted of willfully
aiding and abetting attempts to evade and defeat the federal excise
tax on gasoline, in violation of 26 U.S.C. 7201 (Counts 2, 4, 6);
willfully aiding and abetting failures truthfully to account for and
pay over to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) federal excise taxes on
gasoline, in violation of 26 U.S.C. 7202 (Counts 3, 5, 7);  and
conspiracy to commit the foregoing offenses, to defraud the United
States, and to violate 26 U.S.C. 7206(2) (willful aiding and assisting
in the preparation and presentation of false or fraudulent excise tax
returns), in violation of 18 U.S.C. 371.  Tr. 806-807.  /1/ Petitioner
was sentenced to concurrent three-year terms of imprisonment on each
count and fined a total of $70,000.

   1. Petitioner owned and operated OK Petroleum, a corporation
engaged in the business of buying and selling gasoline through retail
and wholesale outlets in the State of New York.  During the period at
issue, federal law imposed an excise tax of nine cents per gallon on
gasoline sold by "producers" of gasoline, a category that included
certain wholesale gasoline distributors.  The tax, however, was not
applicable to a sale in which both the seller and buyer held a valid
Registration for Tax-Free Transactions (IRS Form 637).  Tr. 120-121,
667-668.  The first registered seller who sold to a non-registered
customer was responsible for paying the tax to the IRS.  However, a
seller who relied in good faith on a certification by a buyer that the
latter held a valid Form 647, and who sold to the buyer on a tax-free
basis, was not liable for payment of the tax;  in that event, the
buyer became liable.  Tr. 667-668, 683.  In December 1982 and January
1983, OK applied for an IRS Form 637 permitting it to engage in
tax-free transactions, but it never obtained one.  Pet. App. 3a-4a.

   During the first three quarters of 1983, OK made purchases of
gasoline from General Oil Distributors, Inc., on which the excise
taxes were not paid.  The sales were made pursuant to representations
by petitioner that OK held a valid Form 637.  OK's untaxed purchases
during the third quarter of 1983 were the subject of Counts 6 and 7 of
the indictment.  Those purchases amounted to more than 3,000,000
gallons, on which OK's tax liability totalled more than $270,000.
Upon learning that OK did not hold a valid Form 637, General Oil
Distributors discontinued untaxed sales of gasoline to OK.  Pet. App.
4a;  Tr. 157-168, 415, 599, 666-669.

   Petitioner then devised a "daisy chain scheme" to buy gasoline on
which the excise tax was not paid.  Under the scheme, gasoline was
delivered by a number of different suppliers to one of two companies
(AKA Petroleum or CWM Petroleum) that petitioner controlled.  The
gasoline was initially purchased from the suppliers by Rappaport Fuel
Co., which held a Form 637.  Rappaport then issued invoices for
fictitious tax-free sales of the gasoline to other companies, not
controlled by petitioner or his codefendant, that operated for the
specific purpose of evading excise taxes.  Those companies, which also
held Forms 637, operated for a short period of time to allow firms to
document fictitious sales of untaxed gasoline to them, and then went
out of existence, leaving large amounts of taxes unpaid.  In most
instances, AKA or CWM paid the distributors for the gasoline purchased
by Rappaport.  By means of this scheme, petitioner purchased more than
8,000,000 gallons of gasoline, on which neither he nor Rappaport paid
the excise taxes due in the amount of more than $770,000.  Pet. App.
4a.

   2. a. On appeal, petitioner initially contended that his conviction
on the substantive counts was barred by the statute of limitations
because the indictment was filed more than three years after the last
act relating to those counts.  /2/ Petitioner argued that committing
the substantive offenses of attempted tax evasion and willful failure
to pay a tax by means of aiding and abetting is subject to the general
three-year limitations period in 26 U.S.C. 6531 for criminal tax
offenses, rather than the six-year limitations period applicable to
the substantive offenses of tax evasion and failure to pay a tax, see
26 U.S.C. 6531(2) and (4).

   Petitioner's position was based on the fact that another exception
to the general three-year limitations period, contained in Subsection
(3) of 26 U.S.C. 6531, expressly provides a six-year limitations
period for the offense of willfully "aiding or assisting in, or
procuring, counseling, or advising, the preparation or presentation"
of a false or fraudulent tax return or document.  Pet. App. 11a-12a.
Petitioner contended that the reference to "aiding or assisting" under
that provision refers to aiding or abetting under 18 U.S.C. 2, and
that by application of the maxim expressio unius est exclusio
alterius, the failure to mention "aiding or assisting" in connection
with the offenses of tax evasion and failure to pay a tax mentioned in
Subsections (2) and (4) of 26 U.S.C. 6531 means that the six-year
limitations period under those provisions is inapplicable to one who
commits either of those offenses by aiding or abetting.  The court of
appeals rejected petitioner's argument.  /3/ Following United States
v. Campbell, 426 F.2d 547, 553 (2d Cir. 1970), the court held that the
limitations period applicable to the commission of an offense by
aiding or abetting is the period applicable to the substantive offense
charged.  Pet. App. 11a-16a.

   b. After this case had been briefed and argued in the court of
appeals, this Court decided Gomez v. United States, 109 S. Ct. 2237
(1989), which held that a magistrate may not, over the defendant's
objection, conduct jury selection in a felony prosecution.  Because
the jury in this case had been selected by a magistrate, petitioner
asked the court of appeals to withhold its decision until he filed a
supplemental brief on the question whether Gomez required reversal of
his conviction.  Following the filing of supplemental briefs, the
court held that reversal was not required because petitioner had
failed to object to that procedure.  Pet. App. 16a-22a.

   c. On July 18, 1990, the government filed a motion in the court of
appeals for partial remand to permit the district court to vacate
petitioner's convictions and sentences on Counts 3, 5 and 7, which
charged aiding and abetting willful failures to account truthfully for
and pay over excise taxes on gasoline.  The government informed the
court that it had recently become convinced that 26 U.S.C. 7202 does
not apply to the gasoline excise taxes at issue in this case.
Petitioner and his co-defendant then filed motions to remand the case
to the district court to consider whether their convictions on the
conspiracy count should be vacated as well.  On September 14, 1990,
the court of appeals remanded the case to the district court to vacate
petitioner's convictions under 26 U.S.C. 7202 and for a new trial on
the conspiracy count, because it could not "determine whether the
conspiracy conviction was based properly on a violation of Section
7201 or, as now appears, improperly on Section 7202." The court of
appeals did not disturb the convictions at issue here -- those on the
three counts of aiding and abetting willful attempts to evade and
defeat the excise tax on gasoline, in violation of 26 U.S.C. 7201.

                               ARGUMENT

   1. Petitioner contends (Pet. 4-6) that his convictions for aiding
and abetting evasion of the gasoline excise tax were barred by the
statute of limitations.

   The periods of limitation for instituting criminal prosecutions
under the criminal tax laws are set forth in 26 U.S.C. 6531, which
provides in relevant part:

         No person shall be prosecuted, tried, or punished for any of
      the various offenses arising under the internal revenue laws
      unless the indictment is found or the information instituted
      within 3 years next after the commission of the offense, except
      that the period of limitation shall be 6 years --

         (1) for offenses involving the defrauding or attempting to
      defraud the United States or any agency therefore, whether by
      conspiracy or not, and in any manner;

         (2) for the offense of willfully attempting in any manner to
      evade or defeat any tax or the payment thereof;

         (3) for the offense of willfully aiding or assisting in, or
      procuring, counseling, or advising, the preparation or
      presentation under, or in connection with any matter arising
      under, the internal revenue laws, of a false or fraudulent
      return, affidavit, claim, or document (whether or not such
      falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the person
      authorized or required to present such return, affidavit, claim,
      or document);

         (4) for the offense of willfully failing to pay any tax, or
      make any return * * *, at the time or times required by law or
      regulations;

                     * * * * *

         (8) for offenses arising under Section 371 of Title 18 of the
      United States Code, where the object of the conspiracy is to
      attempt in any manner to evade or defeat any tax or the payment
      thereof.

                      * * * * *

   The indictment in this case was returned within six years of the
completion of the offenses, but not within three years.  Petitioner
contends that the period of limitations applicable to aiding and
abetting attempted tax evasion is the three-year period provided for
tax offenses generally, rather than the six-year period provided by
Subsection (2) of Section 6531 for the offense of attempted tax
evasion.  He bases that claim on the specific provision in Subsection
(3) for the offense of "willfully aiding or assisting in, or
procuring, counseling, or advising, the preparation or presentation"
of a false tax document.  26 U.S.C. 6531(3).  In his view (Pet. 4),
because "this is the only offense for which aiding and abetting
carries its own Statute of Limitations," under the maxim expressio
unius est exclusio alterius, "the failure to mention aiding and
abetting any other offense must be construed as Congress' expression
of intent to exclude aiding and abetting any other offense from those
with six-year limitation periods." The court of appeals correctly
rejected that argument.  Pet. App. 11a-16a.

   By its terms, Section 6531 prescribes limitations periods for
various "offenses." It is well settled that aiding and abetting is not
an independent offense.  See United States v. Kegler, 724 F.2d 190,
200-201 (D.C. Cir. 1984);  United States v. Campbell, 426 F.2d 547,
553 (2d Cir. 1970).  Under 18 U.S.C. 2, an aider or abettor is a
principal in the commission of a substantive offense and is guilty of
committing that offense.  See Standefer v. United States, 447 U.S. 10,
20 (1980);  Nye & Nissen v. United States, 336 U.S. 613, 618-619
(1949);  United States v. Johnson, 319 U.S. 503, 514 (1943).  It is
not even necessary to charge an aider or abettor in that capacity;
one charged with committing an offense may be convicted on evidence
that he merely aided and abetted.  See, e.g., Jin Fuey Moy v. United
States, 254 U.S. 189 (1920) (physician charged with sale of narcotic
drugs properly convicted on evidence that he aided an unlawful sale by
a druggist);  United States v. Kegler, 724 F.2d at 201;  United States
v. Frye, 548 F.2d 765, 767 n.4 (8th Cir. 1977).  Thus, one who aids
and abets attempted tax evasion is guilty of that offense, United
States v. Johnson, 319 U.S. at 514-515, and the appropriate
limitations period is the period prescribed for that offense.  See
United States v. Campbell, 426 F.2d at 553.

   There is no basis for assuming, as petitioner does, that in
legislating with regard to "offenses" in 26 U.S.C. 6531, Congress
intended to prescribe a period of limitations specifically for tax
prosecutions brought in reliance on 18 U.S.C. 2.  This point is
confirmed by a close examination of the language of Subsection (3),
upon which petitioner relies.  Its language tracks, almost verbatim,
that of 26 U.S.C. 7206(2), which defines the substantive offense of
"aiding or assisting" in the preparation or presentation of a false or
fraudulent tax return or other document.  /4/ Although Subsection (3)
does not mention Section 7206(2) by section number, it could not be
clearer, in light of the virtually identical language of the two
sections, that Section 6531(3) refers to the offense described by
Section 7206(2).  /5/ This obvious reference to an offense described
in full in Title 26 refutes the notion that Subsection (3) was
specifically intended to refer to the commission of an offense by
means of aiding or abetting that is made criminal only by the
generally applicable provisions of 18 U.S.C. 2.

   A fortiori, Congress's use of the unique terminology of Section
7206(2) ("aiding or assisting") in Subsection (3) alone does not
suggest that Congress intended implicitly to address the commission of
the criminal tax offenses mentioned in the other subsections of
Section 6531 by means of aiding and abetting under 18 U.S.C. 2.  There
is therefore no reason to disregard the usual rule that the statute of
limitations for an offense is the same regardless of whether the
defendant is charged as a traditional principal or as an aider or
abettor.

   Contrary to petitioner's assertion (Pet. 5), there is no conflict
between the decision in this case and decisions holding that the
statute of limitations for tax offenses governs prosecutions under 18
U.S.C. 371 for conspiracy to violate the tax laws.  The courts below
applied the statute of limitations applicable to tax offenses, 26
U.S.C. 6531, not the statute of limitations applicable to criminal
prosecutions generally, 18 U.S.C. 3282.  It was appropriate for the
court of appeals to look to general principles of criminal law
regarding aiding and abetting, embodied in 18 U.S.C. 2, to determine
whether Congress intended, by enacting Subsection (3) of 26 U.S.C.
6531, to treat aiding and abetting as an independent offense for
statute of limitations purposes under Title 26.  In determining the
meaning of a statutory provision, a court may take into consideration
the framework in which it exists.  See Crandon v. United States, 110
S. Ct. 997, 1001 (1990);  FBI v. Abramson, 456 U.S. 615, 625 (1982);
Mrvica v. Esperdy, 317 F.2d 220, 222 (2d Cir. 1963), aff'd, 376 U.S.
560 (1964).  Principles regarding the aiding and abetting statute are
part of the framework in which the criminal tax laws exist.  See
United States v. Johnson, 319 U.S. at 314-315.  Nothing in Section
6531 or any other provision of the Internal Revenue Code suggests that
Congress intended to depart from those principles when it enacted the
criminal tax laws.

   2. Petitioner also contends (Pet. 6-7) that the court of appeals
erred in holding that this Court's decision in Gomez v. United States,
109 S. Ct. 2237 (1989), does not require reversal of his convictions
because he did not object to a magistrate's conducting jury selection.
 The same issue is presented in United States v. France, cert.
granted, 110 S. Ct. 1921 (1990) (argued Oct. 2, 1990).  We therefore
suggest that the Court hold the petition in this case and dispose of
it as appropriate in light of the decision in France.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be held with respect
to the second question presented and then disposed of as appropriate
in light of this Court's disposition of United States v. France, cert.
granted, 110 S. Ct. 1921 (1990) (argued Oct. 2, 1990).  In all other
respects, the petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   SHIRLEY D. PETERSON

      Assistant Attorney General

   ROBERT E. LINDSAY

   ALAN HECHTKOPF

      Attorneys

   NOVEMBER 1990

   /1/ A co-defendant, Joseph Gambino, was charged with the same
offenses in five counts of the indictment.  He was tried with
petitioner and was convicted only on the conspiracy count.  Tr.
806-807.  As discussed below (see page 6, infra), the court of appeals
has remanded the case for a new trial on the conspiracy count.

   /2/ Petitioner also argued that the government had improperly
bolstered the credibility of certain witnesses by questioning them
about provisions of cooperation agreements requiring the witnesses to
testify truthfully.  The court of appeals rejected that claim, Pet.
App. 5a-6a, and petitioner does not renew it in this Court.

   /3/ The district court had also rejected petitioner's argument in
denying his motion to dismiss the indictment on statute of limitations
grounds.  United States v. Musacchia, 696 F. Supp. 1548 (E.D.N.Y.
1988).

   /4/ Section 7206(2) provides that any person who "(w)illfully aids
or assists in, or procures, counsels, or advises the preparation or
presentation under, or in connection with any matter arising under,
the internal revenue laws, or a return, affidavit, claim, or other
document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter,
whether or not such falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent
of the person authorized or required to present such return,
affidavit, claim, or document," shall be guilty of a felony.

   /5/ The exceptions in Subsections (1), (2), and (3) of Section 6531
to the three-year limitations period all existed under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1939.  See 26 U.S.C. 3748 (1952 ed.).  None of those
provisions referred to other Code sections by number.  The succeeding
Subsections in Section 6531 that now cite specific sections of the
Internal Revenue Code containing substantive offenses were added when
the 1954 Code was enacted.  Given this difference between the older
and the newer subsections of Section 6531, the cross-references to
specific Code sections in the newer subsections in no way undermines
the conclusion that Subsection (3) refers to the substantive offense
in Section 7206(2) of "aiding or assisting" in the preparation of
false returns, even though it does not cite to that Section's
numerical designation in the Code.
