This is the accessible text file for GAO report number GAO-03-821 
entitled 'Taxpayer Information: Increased Sharing and Verifying of 
Information Could Improve Education's Award Decisions' which was 
released on August 18, 2003.

This text file was formatted by the U.S. General Accounting Office 
(GAO) to be accessible to users with visual impairments, as part of a 
longer term project to improve GAO products' accessibility. Every 
attempt has been made to maintain the structural and data integrity of 
the original printed product. Accessibility features, such as text 
descriptions of tables, consecutively numbered footnotes placed at the 
end of the file, and the text of agency comment letters, are provided 
but may not exactly duplicate the presentation or format of the printed 
version. The portable document format (PDF) file is an exact electronic 
replica of the printed version. We welcome your feedback. Please E-mail 
your comments regarding the contents or accessibility features of this 
document to Webmaster@gao.gov.

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright 
protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed 
in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work 
may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the 
copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this 
material separately.

On November 16, 2003, this document was revised to add various 
footnote references missing in the text of the body of the document.

Report to the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate:

United States General Accounting Office:

GAO:

July 2003:

Taxpayer Information:

Increased Sharing and Verifying of Information Could Improve 
Education's Award Decisions:

GAO-03-821:

GAO Highlights:

Highlights of GAO-03-821, a report to the Committee on Finance, U.S. 
Senate 

Why GAO Did This Study:

Data sharing can be a valuable tool for federal agencies in 
determining applicants’ eligibility for benefit and loan programs. 
Congress has authorized the Department of Education, among others, to 
have limited access to federal taxpayer information collected by the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Likewise, IRS is able to use personal 
information collected by outside sources to better ensure that 
taxpayers are meeting their tax obligations.

GAO was asked to determine whether Education uses taxpayer information 
to verify information provided by student aid applicants, and the 
benefits of increasing data verification activities, and whether IRS 
uses personal information maintained by Education to ensure that 
taxpayers meet their tax obligations, and the benefits of increasing 
these activities.

What GAO Found:

Education uses taxpayer information for several purposes, such as 
locating loan defaulters; researching and computing statistical data 
on overall borrower debt; and, upon taxpayers’ consent, determining 
loan repayment amounts. However, Education is not authorized to 
directly receive taxpayer information from IRS to verify eligibility 
for student financial aid provided under Title IV of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (HEA). In academic year 2001-02, 11.4 million 
students applied for $54 billion in aid. 

A 1998 amendment to HEA was intended to authorize the matching of 
student aid applicant information with several elements of federal 
income tax return information. However, HEA could not be used as 
intended because Internal Revenue Code Section 6103 was not 
specifically amended so that Education and its contractors, which 
assist Education in administering the various financial aid programs, 
could have access to taxpayer information. Based on a study that 
matched Education data and IRS income information, Education estimates 
that it made approximately $602 million in grant overpayments during 
fiscal years 2001 and 2002. 

IRS does not use personal information collected from applicants and 
maintained by Education to ensure that taxpayers meet their tax 
obligations because IRS officials believe the taxpayer information IRS 
receives is more accurate. In general, IRS officials’ views are 
supported by IRS’s past estimates of taxpayers’ levels of compliance 
and by the results of Education’s studies and investigations. For 
example, in the mid-1990s, IRS estimated that taxpayers with only wage 
income had a 99 percent voluntary compliance rate and taxpayers with 
interest and dividend income were 95 percent compliant in reporting 
this income. However, Education’s student aid application data are not 
suited to IRS’s tax administration purposes because the applications 
ask students and/or their parents to report data that come directly 
from their tax returns.

What GAO Recommends:

GAO is not making any recommendations. However, earlier this year GAO 
recommended that Congress consider legislation to authorize IRS to 
release individual income data to Education so that Education could 
verify income on student aid applications. The IRS Commissioner and 
Education’s Chief Operating Officer of Federal Student Aid raised no 
concerns in commenting on a draft of this report. The Chief Operating 
Officer said Education would continue to support a legislative 
change.

www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-821.

To view the full report, including the scope and methodology, click on 
the link above. For more information, contact Michael Brostek at (202) 
512-9039 or brostekm@gao.gov.

[End of section]

Contents:

Letter:

Results in Brief:

Background:

Education Could Benefit from Access to Taxpayer Information to Verify 
Student Eligibility for Financial Aid Programs:

IRS Does Not Use Education's Student Aid Data and the Potential Benefit 
of Doing So Appears to Be Limited:

Concluding Observations:

Agency Comments and Our Evaluation:

Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and Methodology:

Appendix II: Comments from the Internal Revenue Service:

Appendix III: Comments from the Department of Education:

Table:

Table 1: Selected Examples of Federal Student Aid Fraud Identified by 
Education's OIG:

Figures:

Figure 1: Title IV Federal Student Aid by Source for Academic Year 
2001-02 (Constant Dollars):

Figure 2: Total Title IV Federal Student Aid Dollars from Academic 
Years 1991-92 to 2001-02 (in Constant Dollars):

United States General Accounting Office:

Washington, DC 20548:

July 18, 2003:

The Honorable Charles E. Grassley 
Chairman 
The Honorable Max Baucus 
Ranking Minority Member 
Committee on Finance 
United States Senate:

Each year, federal agencies make billions of dollars of improper 
payments under various federal programs. Over the years, Congress has 
authorized a number of federal agencies to have access to federal 
taxpayer information[Footnote 1] collected by the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) to improve the accuracy of eligibility determinations 
made by those agencies. The authorized agencies are able to verify 
(i.e., match or cross-check) some personal information[Footnote 2] 
provided by applicants against corresponding information reported to 
IRS.

Similarly, IRS is able to use some of the personal information obtained 
from federal and state agencies to better ensure that taxpayers are 
meeting their tax obligations. Various federal laws and agency policies 
regulate agencies' use and disclosure of taxpayer and personal 
information. Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) allows IRS 
to disclose taxpayer information to federal agencies and authorized 
employees of those agencies, but only under specific conditions. Such 
privacy protection is an important component of continued voluntary 
compliance with the internal revenue laws.

Because of continued concerns about balancing taxpayer privacy 
interests with potential increased benefits from the sharing of 
taxpayer information among agencies administering federal benefit and 
loan programs, you asked us to assess whether IRS and selected federal 
agencies--the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (formerly 
the Immigration and Naturalization Service), the Social Security 
Administration, and the Department of Education--are making use of 
opportunities to use taxpayer information and personal applicant 
information to improve eligibility determinations and tax 
administration.

During the course of this work, you asked us to report separately on 
the data sharing and verifying activities between IRS and Education and 
provide information that can be used as Congress considers legislative 
changes to IRC Section 6103. As agreed with your offices, our 
objectives were to determine whether (1) Education uses IRS taxpayer 
information to verify information provided by applicants for federal 
student financial aid and the benefits, if any, of increasing 
verification activities and (2) IRS uses personal information 
maintained by Education to ensure that taxpayers meet their tax 
obligations and the benefits, if any, of increasing these activities.

To respond to your request, we performed our work at various IRS 
offices, including compliance and research offices, and various program 
offices at Education. As used in this report, "data sharing" means 
obtaining and disclosing information on individuals between Education 
and IRS to determine eligibility for student financial aid and to 
ensure that taxpayers have met their obligations. We collected and 
analyzed information on data sharing and verifying activities between 
IRS and Education, including the type of information received and how 
the information is used. We reviewed federal laws and agency guidance 
regarding the collection, disclosure, and use of taxpayer and other 
personal information. We also interviewed IRS and Education officials 
to obtain views on possible impediments or missed opportunities to 
share and verify taxpayer and other personal information, as well as 
the potential benefits of increasing these activities. We conducted our 
work from August 2002 through June 2003 in accordance with generally 
accepted government auditing standards. For details on our scope and 
methodology, see appendix I.

Results in Brief:

Education is not authorized to directly receive taxpayer information 
from IRS to verify eligibility for its student financial aid programs, 
for which Education estimates it made hundreds of millions in Pell 
Grant overpayments in fiscal years 2001 and 2002. Education uses 
taxpayer information for several purposes, such as locating loan 
defaulters; researching and computing statistical data on overall 
borrower debt; and, upon taxpayers' consent, determining loan repayment 
amounts. However, Education is not authorized to directly receive 
taxpayer information from IRS to verify eligibility for student 
financial aid provided under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (HEA).

In 1998, HEA was amended to allow increased data sharing. However, the 
provision could not be used as intended because IRC Section 6103 was 
not specifically amended so that Education and its contractors could 
have access to taxpayer information. In academic year 2001-02, 11.4 
million students applied for $54 billion in aid under these programs. 
Education demonstrated the benefits of using taxpayer information to 
verify the personal information that is used to determine student aid 
applicants' need for assistance. Based on a study that matched 
Education data and IRS income information, Education estimates that it 
made approximately $602 million in Pell Grant overpayments during 
fiscal years 2001 and 2002.

IRS does not use personal information collected from applicants and 
maintained by Education to ensure that taxpayers meet their tax 
obligations because IRS officials believe the taxpayer information they 
already receive is more accurate. In general, IRS officials' views are 
supported by IRS's own data and by the results of Education studies and 
investigations. For example, in the mid-1990s, IRS estimated that 
taxpayers with only wage income had a 99 percent voluntary compliance 
rate and taxpayers with interest and dividend income were 95 percent 
compliant in reporting this income. Taxpayers with certain other 
sources of income are much less compliant. However, Education's student 
aid application data are not suited to aiding IRS's efforts because the 
applications ask students and/or their parents to report data that come 
directly from their tax returns.

We are not making any recommendations. However, in September 2000 we 
recommended that Congress consider amending IRC Section 6103 to 
authorize IRS to disclose certain taxpayer information to Education for 
the purpose of verifying information reported on federal student aid 
applications. Earlier this year, we also reported that Education could 
benefit from receiving taxpayer information for this purpose.

On July 15, 2003, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the Chief 
Operating Officer of Education's Office of Federal Student Aid raised 
no concerns in responding to a draft of this report. (See the Agency 
Comments and Our Evaluation section and apps. II and III.) Officials 
representing the Office of Federal Student Aid provided technical 
comments, which we have incorporated into the report where appropriate.

Background:

IRC Section 6103 allows IRS to disclose taxpayer information to federal 
agencies and to authorized employees of those agencies for specified 
purposes. It was enacted, in part, to control whether and how tax 
information submitted to IRS on federal tax returns could be shared. 
IRC Section 6103 specifies which agencies (or other entities) may have 
access to certain types of tax return information, for what purposes 
such access may be granted, and under what conditions the information 
will be received. For example, before receiving taxpayer information, 
agencies are required to advise IRS how they intend to use the 
information and to establish detailed plans that ensure the 
confidentiality and safeguarding of the information.

Similar to IRC Section 6103, the Privacy Act of 1974 regulates the 
federal government's use of personal information by limiting the 
collection, disclosure, and use of personal information maintained in 
an agency's system of records. Personal information is further 
protected by the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 
(Privacy Act). It requires that agencies enter into written agreements, 
referred to as matching agreements, when they share information that is 
protected by the Privacy Act for the purpose of conducting computer 
matches.

IRS receives tax returns from about 88 million individual taxpayers who 
have wage and investment income, and approximately 45 million small 
business and self-employed taxpayers. IRS performs a variety of checks 
to ensure the accuracy of information these taxpayers report on their 
tax returns. These checks include verifying computations on returns, 
requesting more information about items on tax returns, and matching 
information reported by third parties to income reported by taxpayers 
on returns (e.g., document matching). IRS's document matching program 
has proven to be a highly cost-effective way of identifying 
underreported income, thereby bringing in billions of dollars of tax 
revenue while at the same time boosting voluntary compliance.

Approximately 11 million individuals applied for over $50 billion in 
federal student financial aid in academic year 2001-02. Title IV of HEA 
authorized several student aid programs, including the following:

* Pell Grants--grants to undergraduate students who are enrolled in 
degree or certificate programs and have federally defined financial 
need;

* Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants (SEOG)--grants for 
undergraduate students with federally defined financial need;

* Stafford[Footnote 3] and Parent Loans for Undergraduate Students 
(PLUS) loans[Footnote 4]--loans that are made by private lenders and 
guaranteed by the federal government (guaranteed loans) or made 
directly by the federal government through a student's school (Direct 
Loans);

* Perkins loans--low-interest loans to undergraduate and graduate 
students for which interest does not accrue while the students are 
enrolled at least half-time in eligible programs; and:

* Work-study--on-or off-campus jobs for which students who have 
federally defined need earn at least the current federal minimum wage 
and for which institutions or off-campus employers pay a portion of 
their wages.

As shown in figure 1, for academic year 2001-02, 78 percent of federal 
student aid came from loans, 20 percent came from grants, and 2 percent 
came from federal work-study programs.

Figure 1: Title IV Federal Student Aid by Source for Academic Year 
2001-02 (Constant Dollars):

[See PDF for image]

Notes: Percentages based on estimated dollar amounts for academic year 
2001-02. Percentage of grants includes both Pell Grants and SEOGs. 
Percentage of loans includes Stafford loans, PLUS loans, and Perkins 
loans. Current year dollars adjusted for inflation using the Consumer 
Price Index as calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. 
Department of Labor.

[End of figure]

Education has created many information systems to support the various 
student financial aid programs it administers. In many cases, these 
systems are maintained and operated by contractors, which are 
responsible for processing the student financial aid application data 
and providing such data to the schools, as well as to Education to use 
in managing and overseeing the programs. As such, a student's financial 
aid process begins when he or she submits the Free Application for 
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The student (and parents of a dependent 
student) submits the FAFSA to the contractor that enters the data from 
the application. On behalf of Education, the contractor calculates the 
expected family contribution figure and performs database matches and 
edits to ensure that all needed information is included and that the 
student meets eligibility requirements, including not having defaulted 
on a prior student loan. The contractor then sends the results of the 
matches and other processing results to the student and the school(s). 
The school(s) request any supporting documents needed to verify 
application data and determine the student's eligibility for aid, and 
construct an award package of available types of aid. Funds are then 
disbursed to the school(s) according to the student financial aid 
program requirements.

Education Could Benefit from Access to Taxpayer Information to Verify 
Student Eligibility for Financial Aid Programs:

Education uses taxpayer information for some eligibility determinations 
and other purposes, but is not authorized to directly receive taxpayer 
information from IRS to verify student financial aid eligibility or 
determine payment amounts for its federal student aid programs--due to 
IRC Section 6103 restrictions. During fiscal years 2001 and 2002, 
Education could have benefited from using taxpayer information to 
verify personal information from student aid applicants. Using 
aggregate IRS income information, Education estimates that $602 million 
in grant overpayments occurred during this time.

Education Uses Taxpayer Information for Several Purposes:

Education uses the taxpayer information it receives from IRS to 
determine approximately 100,000 borrowers' monthly loan repayment 
amounts, to determine the addresses for approximately 4.6 million 
records of borrowers who may have defaulted on their student loans, and 
to develop aggregate borrower debt statistics.

In order to determine the monthly repayment amount for borrowers 
participating in the income contingent repayment (ICR) plan, Education, 
under IRC Section 6103(l)(13), receives income information on the 
borrower from IRS. The ICR plan allows Federal Direct Loan Program 
borrowers to repay loans as a percentage of their income. To 
participate in this program, the borrower must authorize IRS (i.e., 
give his or her consent) to share income information with 
Education.[Footnote 5] Approximately 100,000 consents are processed 
under the ICR plan for repayment each year.

Under the Taxpayer Address Request (TAR) program, as authorized by IRC 
Section 6103(m)(4), IRS provides the mailing addresses of taxpayers to 
Education to be used in collecting debt from student loan 
defaulters.[Footnote 6] Specifically, Education furnishes the name and 
Social Security number (SSN) to the IRS for each defaulted student. IRS 
then conducts a match of the information and provides Education the 
most recent address for the taxpayer. Education sends about 4.6 million 
records annually to IRS for matching under the TAR program.

Additionally, as part of its research activities, Education receives 
aggregate taxpayer income information from IRS in the form of tables 
that it uses in establishing performance measures and selection 
criteria for its student aid application verification process. 
Education also uses these data in researching and computing statistical 
data on overall borrower debt, such as determining the average and 
median debt burden ratios for any given year.

As part of the federal student aid application process, every year 
since the mid-1980s, Education selects approximately 30 percent of its 
student aid applicants for verification purposes.[Footnote 7] When a 
student is selected for verification, he or she is required to provide 
copies of his or her (or parents') tax returns to the school.[Footnote 
8] If the student refuses to do so, he or she will not receive federal 
aid. The school then compares the information on the tax return to 
information on the FAFSA and corrects any inconsistencies on the FAFSA 
to match the information on the tax return.[Footnote 9] This current 
verification process has at least two drawbacks. The process is time 
consuming and paper intensive because it involves approximately 3.6 
million paper copies of tax returns that schools match. In addition, 
the process relies on applicants providing copies of their tax returns, 
which may not be the same as those submitted to IRS.

Beginning in October 2002, Education began an electronic verification 
pilot project involving 148 of these selected students who were asked 
to authorize IRS to release their tax information to their academic 
institutions via the Internet. The purpose of this pilot was to take 
the student and/or his or her parents out of the middle of the 
verification process between the IRS and the school so that the school 
relies on income information it obtains directly from IRS, thereby 
making the process more efficient.

Under this pilot project, once the student, parent, or spouse 
authorized the release of his or her tax information, IRS sent the tax 
transcripts for that individual to the school, which then resolved any 
inconsistencies between information on the tax transcript and on the 
FAFSA. This pilot match ended on March 31, 2003, and, according to an 
Education official, the initial feedback from the participating schools 
and taxpayers was very positive. Education officials are currently 
compiling data from the pilot schools and taxpayers and will be issuing 
a report in the fall of 2003 on the ease of use, statistical data, and 
any needed changes.

Legal Impediment Hinders Data Sharing for Education's Student Financial 
Aid Programs:

Although Education receives some taxpayer information in conjunction 
with some of its programs, IRC Section 6103 does not authorize 
Education to obtain taxpayer information directly from IRS to verify 
eligibility or determine payment amounts for its federal student aid 
programs. Approximately 11.4 million individuals applied for over $50 
billion in federal student financial aid in academic year 2001-02. As 
shown in figure 2, over a 10-year academic period, the amount of 
student aid awarded grew 92 percent, from approximately $28 billion in 
academic year 1991-92 to approximately $54 billion in academic year 
2001-02.

Figure 2: Total Title IV Federal Student Aid Dollars from Academic 
Years 1991-92 to 2001-02 (in Constant Dollars):

[See PDF for image]

Note: Percentages based on estimated dollar amounts for academic years 
2000-01 and 2001-02.

[End of figure]

Also, because IRC Section 6103 does not authorize Education to directly 
obtain taxpayer information from IRS to establish the repayment amount 
for ICR student loans, taxpayer consent is required for IRS to share 
income information with Education.

IRC Section 6103 was enacted, in part, to control whether and how tax 
information submitted to IRS on federal tax returns could be shared. It 
was amended in 1976 in an attempt to balance confidentiality and the 
need to disclose returns and return information for legitimate 
purposes. Determining the most appropriate way to balance these two 
considerations has been an issue that has faced Congress for a number 
of years. Congress believed that not only did taxpayers have a right to 
expect the personal information they report to IRS to remain private, 
but that such privacy protection was also an important component of 
continued voluntary compliance. Moreover, many observers and privacy 
advocates believe that disclosure of return information may decrease 
taxpayers' willingness to comply with the tax law and that tax 
administration suffers when return information is disclosed for nontax 
purposes.

IRC Section 6103 restrictions were the focus of past legislative action 
taken to address limitations on data sharing and matching activities 
between IRS and Education in connection with student financial aid 
programs. According to Education officials, a 1998 amendment to HEA was 
intended to authorize the matching of student aid applicant information 
with several elements of federal income tax return information. 
However, that provision could not be used as intended because IRC 
Section 6103 was not specifically amended so that Education and its 
contractors, which assist Education in administering the various 
financial aid programs, could have access to taxpayer information.

In an October 2000 report to Congress on taxpayer confidentiality and 
the use of taxpayer information, Treasury's Office of Tax Policy 
recommended that IRC Section 6103 be amended to permit disclosure of 
necessary items to Education for income verification, and to permit the 
use of contractors as contemplated by HEA, if Education could show that 
such disclosure was warranted.[Footnote 10] Further, in August 2002, 
officials from Treasury, the Office of Management and Budget, and 
Education proposed a legislative amendment to IRC Section 6103 that 
would allow IRS to match the income reported on federal student aid 
applications with income tax return information and share the results 
with Education.

The language in the proposed amendment stresses balancing the need for 
accurate student aid applicant information with the importance of 
maintaining the integrity of IRS taxpayer information. The proposed 
legislative amendment specifies, "the tax data would be disclosed only 
for very limited purposes, only to the Department of Education and its 
contractors, and then only after a series of rigorous safeguards were 
implemented." The proposed amendment was included in the President's 
Fiscal Year 2004 Budget, which stated that IRS matching of student aid 
application income data with applicant tax data "is projected to save 
$638 million in Pell Grant costs over 2003-2004, significantly reducing 
existing funding shortfalls."[Footnote 11] However, it does not appear 
in the Taxpayer Protection and IRS Accountability Act of 2003--the most 
recent tax bill that contains several other confidentiality and 
disclosure provisions.[Footnote 12] Moreover, as of June 2003, Congress 
had not acted on the proposed amendment.

Apart from the proposed legislative amendment, Education officials 
noted that several operational details remain to be addressed by IRS 
and Education, many of which depend ultimately on the final language in 
the legislation. For example, because the schools act as agents for 
Education in the review, collection, and disbursement of financial aid 
awards, the details surrounding how best to make the matching program 
work for both the schools and the applicants must be addressed. In 
addition, Education officials said careful consideration must be given 
to the timing for matching student aid applications with tax returns. 
According to the officials, most students can submit their FAFSAs 
starting January 1. The applications provide details on their income, 
or that of their parents', for the previous year. However, taxpayers 
have until April 15 to file their tax returns and can request 
extensions. Therefore, IRS information may not be available for 
matching purposes until well after initial student aid eligibility 
determinations have been made. In a September 2000 report, we noted 
that while such a match may not be timely enough for initial 
eligibility verification purposes, it may be possible to conduct a 
match with IRS using fairly complete taxpayer data because financial 
aid payments are typically not made until late August or 
September.[Footnote 13]

Education officials contend that while the timing of the match would be 
less than ideal for helping to make initial student financial aid 
decisions, they have established interim steps to address the timing 
issue, such as multiple disbursement periods and withholding of 
payments until income verification is completed. Even with these 
interim steps in place, they acknowledge that the timing of the 
matching program still remains a challenge. Education officials said 
they are also in the process of identifying other ways to address all 
operational details, and are committed to working with IRS to make the 
matching program a success.

Increased Data Sharing Can Improve Student Financial Aid Decisions:

Increased data sharing and verification between IRS and Education could 
result in better decision making when awarding student financial aid 
and reduced fraud. Both Education's Office of the Inspector General 
(OIG) and we have reported that increased data sharing can improve 
Education's student financial aid decisions. Additionally, Education is 
currently conducting a project that supports the need for increased 
data sharing.

In a September 2000 report, we recommended that Congress consider 
amending IRC Section 6103 to improve the ability of certain federally 
funded benefit and loan programs to obtain and share information to 
make timely and accurate eligibility determinations, while protecting 
personal privacy and the confidentiality of personal 
information.[Footnote 14] Specifically, we said "the Congress should 
consider amending Section 6103(l) of the Internal Revenue Code to 
authorize IRS to disclose certain taxpayer data to officers, employees, 
and contractors or other agents (such as schools) of Education for 
purposes of verifying information reported on applications for 
financial aid." Additionally, our recent January 2003 Performance and 
Accountability Series report indicates that Education could benefit 
from receiving IRS taxpayer information to verify income information 
reported on student aid applications.[Footnote 15]

According to Education's OIG, some students report inaccurate 
information either through error or fraud on their federal student aid 
applications through, for example, underreporting of income. In a 
statement before Congress in 2000, the Education's Inspector General 
stated that underreporting of income by student aid applicants costs 
federal taxpayers over $100 million annually in overawards of Pell 
Grants and awards to ineligible persons. In addition to underreporting, 
Education's OIG found numerous examples of fraud, as shown in table 1. 
Applicants' ability to receive student aid fraudulently could be 
reduced if Education could verify applicant information using IRS 
taxpayer data.

Table 1: Selected Examples of Federal Student Aid Fraud Identified by 
Education's OIG:

Date: 1993-96; Program: Pell Grant; Description of fraud: Falsification 
of student eligibility documents (including false IRS documents) that 
made ineligible students appear eligible. Received in excess of 
$250,000 in Pell Grant funds.

Date: 1994-2000; Program: Pell Grant; Description of fraud: Eight 
admissions representatives charged with three multicount criminal 
indictments for procuring students to falsify financial information to 
qualify for Pell Grant funds.

Date: 1998; Program: Federal student aid; Description of fraud: 
Financial aid consultant lowered clients' incomes on FAFSA and tax 
forms to increase students' chances of receiving financial aid.

Date: 1999; Program: Pell Grant; Description of fraud: Scheme involving 
program fraud, false statements, and tax fraud in connection with 
postsecondary programs the defendants falsely claimed to be 
administering.

Date: 2001; Program: Federal grants, work-study, and loans; Description 
of fraud: Twenty-six people charged in 23 separate criminal cases with 
fraudulently obtaining over $2.6 million in federal grants, work-study, 
and loans.

Date: 2003; Program: Pell Grant; Description of fraud: Defendant found 
guilty of embezzling $600,000 of Pell Grant funds through false 
ownership tactics.

Source: Office of Inspector General, Department of Education.

[End of table]

In addition to these examples of fraud, Education's research indicates 
it may have overpaid an estimated $602 million in Pell Grants over a 2-
year period. As part of its efforts to show the effect of IRC Section 
6103 restrictions on eligibility and payment decisions, Education is 
conducting the Pell Grant Payment Study by matching information 
provided on student aid applications with IRS taxpayer information. The 
study began in 1999 and measures the extent of underreporting and 
overreporting of income based on student aid applicants' 
characteristics, such as income, tax filing status, and recipients' 
schools.

To enable this match, Education provides IRS with a file of student aid 
applicants' SSNs. IRS officials match these SSNs with taxpayer income 
information and provide the aggregated results to Education. This 
format protects the taxpayers' confidentiality, in accordance with IRC 
Section 6103, which prohibits IRS from revealing the identity of these 
taxpayers to Education. Since Education does not know the identity of 
the taxpayers, it can estimate the amount of overpayments but cannot 
associate a specific overpayment with a particular individual and 
cannot ascertain when a mismatch may be legitimate. Thus far, the study 
has estimated the percentage of Pell Grant overpayments to be 3.4 
percent, or $272 million dollars, in fiscal year 2001 and 3.3 percent, 
or $330 million dollars, in fiscal year 2002, for a total of $602 
million. Education has not done a similar study for its loan programs, 
which account for approximately 80 percent of federal student aid 
funds.

Education officials believe amending IRC Section 6103 to enable 
Education to match student aid applicant information with several 
elements of federal income tax return information "would substantially 
reduce the risk of fraud and overpayments" associated with Education's 
student financial aid program, would eliminate the need for taxpayer 
consent in conjunction with the ICR program, and would make the program 
more administratively efficient. This, in turn, would enhance the 
integrity of the federal student aid programs and ensure that students 
are receiving the amounts of assistance for which they are eligible.

IRS Does Not Use Education's Student Aid Data and the Potential Benefit 
of Doing So Appears to Be Limited:

IRS does not use personal information from applicants that Education 
collects and maintains to ensure that taxpayers meet their tax 
obligations because IRS officials believe the taxpayer information IRS 
receives is more accurate. In general, IRS officials' views are 
supported by its past estimates of taxpayers' levels of compliance and 
by the results of Education studies and investigations.

IRS officials cite a number of reasons for not using information 
Education collects and maintains to ensure that taxpayers meet their 
tax obligations. IRS officials said they believe the taxpayer 
information IRS collects and maintains on over 100 million individual 
taxpayers, who file income tax returns annually, is more accurate than 
that collected and maintained by Education from applicants applying for 
federal student aid. The officials noted that because federal student 
aid is based on income, applicants seeking financial aid might be 
inclined to underreport their income to Education in hopes of securing 
larger aid awards. The officials said they believe most taxpayers know 
that failure to fully disclose income to IRS could result in an audit 
or the use of IRS enforcement authorities to collect delinquent 
taxes.[Footnote 16] Further, the officials also said they believe the 
requirement to file a tax return annually helps to ensure that some of 
the information IRS maintains, such as taxpayers' addresses, is more 
current when compared to similar information maintained by Education.

IRS routinely relies on information from third-party sources (e.g., 
banks) to ensure that taxpayers meet their tax obligations, including 
both whether taxpayers correctly report information necessary to 
determine the taxes due, if any, and whether any taxpayers who should 
have filed returns did not. Through its document matching programs, IRS 
uses these third-party documents to verify what taxpayers report on 
their tax returns.[Footnote 17] Similarly, IRS identifies individuals 
who did not file tax returns if it receives third-party documents for 
these individuals.

Past IRS estimates of taxpayers' compliance have indicated that 
taxpayers whose incomes are subject to document matching are among the 
most compliant. For example, in the mid-1990s, IRS estimated that 
taxpayers with only wage income had a 99 percent voluntary reporting 
compliance rate, and taxpayers with interest and dividend income were 
95 percent compliant in reporting this income. IRS is currently 
conducting a study that is intended to update these compliance 
estimates.

However, although document matching programs work well for taxpayers 
whose incomes are subject to third-party reporting to IRS, they do not 
help when taxpayers have sources of income that are not subject to such 
reporting. Both the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration 
and we have previously reported that taxpayers whose incomes are not 
subject to information reporting, like those who are self-employed, are 
much less compliant in fulfilling their tax obligations than those 
whose incomes are subject to such reporting.[Footnote 18]

However, the data collected and maintained by Education are not suited 
to helping IRS identify taxpayers who are not covered by existing 
document matching programs. The student aid applications ask students 
and/or their parents to report income information directly from their 
tax returns and generally do not ask for other corroboration of income.

IRS officials' view that IRS data are likely to be more accurate than 
Education's data is also supported by Education's studies. As noted 
earlier, Education's Pell Grant Payment Study results have found that 
some student aid applicants have underreported income on their 
applications compared to the income that they reported to IRS. Although 
Education estimates some underpayments to students during these 
studies, officials say that these, in their judgment, appear to result 
from mistakes in filling out applications. The work of the Education 
OIG also suggests that a significant number of student aid applicants 
falsify copies of tax returns or other information that they submit to 
Education to show lower incomes and thereby claim higher amounts of 
student aid.

Given that Education data may have limited utility for tax 
administration, IRS has not investigated use of the data for tax 
administration. If Congress does authorize Education to obtain taxpayer 
information to verify students' eligibility for financial aid, the 
resulting database of mismatches between data reported to each 
institution may represent a ready and low-cost opportunity for IRS to 
investigate whether there is any reasonable potential for using 
Education information for tax administration purposes. The database 
mismatches would identify how many, if any, student aid applicants 
reported less income to IRS than to Education and the number of cases 
in which the applicants may not have filed tax returns at all.

Concluding Observations:

Education obtains some information from IRS to use in administering its 
programs but is unable to obtain information that could help it reduce 
financial aid overpayments that it estimated to total $602 million in 
fiscal years 2001 and 2002. As government agencies continue to seek 
efficient ways to improve federal benefit and loan program decisions by 
reducing fraud and error, data sharing has been a valuable tool for 
supporting integrity in federal programs. However, the need to verify 
self-reported information must be balanced with privacy concerns. 
Existing disclosure laws help ensure that federal agencies properly 
handle the personal information they collect. Modifying the legal 
constraints in IRC Section 6103 for sharing taxpayer information--with 
accompanying requirements to ensure that the data are used only for 
authorized purposes--is one way to address student aid program 
vulnerabilities while retaining protections for personal privacy. We 
have previously recommended that Congress consider such a change.

IRS does not use student aid application data because IRS officials 
believe that the data IRS receives are more accurate than student aid 
application data. This belief is supported by IRS data and by Education 
studies, and thus there appears to be little benefit to attempting to 
use the Education data for tax administration purposes.

Agency Comments and Our Evaluation:

We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Commissioner 
of Internal Revenue and the Secretary of Education. On July 15, 2003, 
the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the Chief Operating Officer of 
Education's Office of Federal Student Aid each provided written 
comments on a draft of this report. (See apps II and III, 
respectively.) Officials representing the Office of Federal Student Aid 
also provided technical comments to clarify specific sections of the 
draft report. We have incorporated these comments into the report where 
appropriate.

The IRS Commissioner and Education officials raised no concerns. In his 
comments, the Commissioner noted that although we did not make any 
recommendations, the report provides an accurate and comprehensive 
review of the issue, and will be a good source document for 
policymakers as they address increased sharing of taxpayer information. 
Additionally, the Chief Operating Officer acknowledged the potential 
for saving hundreds of millions of dollars annually in overpayments and 
other benefits through an effective data matching program with IRS, and 
said that Education officials would continue to support necessary 
legislative changes.

As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents 
earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days 
from its date. At that time we will send copies to the Chairman and 
Ranking Minority Member, House Committee on Ways and Means; the 
Chairman and Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Oversight, House 
Committee on Ways and Means; the Secretary of Education; the Secretary 
of the Treasury; and the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. We will also 
make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report 
will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://
www.gao.gov.

If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please 
contact me at (202) 512-9110 or on brostekm@gao.gov, or Signora May at 
(404) 679-1920 or on maysj1@gao.gov. Other staff who made key 
contributions to this report were Michelle Bowsky, Michele Fejfar, 
Jyoti Gupta, Shirley Jones, Anne Laffoon, and Miltresa McMichael.

Michael Brostek: 

Director, Tax Issues:

[End of section]

Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and Methodology:

To respond to your request, we performed our work at various Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) offices, including the Office of Governmental 
Liaison; the Office of Safeguards; the Office of Program, Evaluation, 
and Risk Analysis; and the Privacy Advocate's Office. Our work also 
included interviews with employees in IRS's Wage and Investment 
Operating Division and IRS's Small Business/Self Employed Operating 
Division, the Department of the Treasury's Office of Tax Policy and the 
Office of the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, and 
program offices at the Department of Education. We collected and 
analyzed information on data sharing and matching between IRS and 
Education during fiscal years 2000 through 2002.

To determine whether Education uses IRS taxpayer information to verify 
information provided by applicants for federal student aid and the 
benefits of increasing verification activities, we analyzed the student 
financial aid application and determined what personal information 
Education collects from applicants. We interviewed Education officials 
as well as IRS officials to obtain data on the type of taxpayer 
information received from IRS, including how, when, and for what 
purpose the information is received. We identified the legislative and 
regulatory authorities that govern IRS's disclosure of taxpayer 
information to Education.

Additionally, we determined how Education is using the information 
received from applicants and IRS, and whether it is matching/cross-
checking the information to improve eligibility determinations. To 
determine the benefits of increasing verification activities, we 
collected and analyzed data to assess how increased disclosure of 
information would affect taxpayer confidentiality and privacy 
interests. We interviewed IRS and Education officials to obtain views 
on possible impediments or missed opportunities to match/cross-check 
information to make better programmatic decisions, and we reviewed 
existing studies or reports on data matching/cross-checking activities. 
We determined what personal information Education collects but does not 
match/cross-check with IRS and why not, and whether officials believed 
matching/cross-checking would be useful for eligibility 
determinations.

To determine whether IRS uses personal information maintained by 
Education to ensure that taxpayers meet their tax obligations and the 
benefits of increasing such activities, we collected data to determine 
what personal information IRS obtains from Education. We interviewed 
IRS and Education officials to obtain data on the type of personal 
information that is received from Education, including how, when, and 
for what purpose the information is received. We identified the 
legislative and regulatory authorities that govern Education's 
disclosure of personal information to IRS.

Additionally, we assessed how IRS is using the information received 
from Education, and whether it is matching/cross-checking the 
information to better ensure taxpayers are meeting their tax 
obligations. To determine the benefits of increasing verification 
activities, we collected and analyzed data to determine what personal 
information IRS receives from Education but does not match/cross-check 
and why not, and whether officials believe the information would be 
useful for tax administration. We determined what personal information 
IRS does not receive from Education, whether IRS is aware of the 
information, and whether IRS officials believe receiving it would be 
useful for tax administration.

As used in this report, "data sharing" means obtaining and disclosing 
information on individuals between Education and the IRS to determine 
eligibility for student financial aid and to ensure that taxpayers have 
met their obligations. Education's use of taxpayer information to 
verify information obtained from applicants refers to the matching or 
cross-checking procedures that are conducted, and is covered by 
interagency computer matching agreements between IRS and Education.

Our review was subject to some limitations. We did not assess the 
reliability or quality of taxpayer and other personal information that 
is shared and verified between Education and IRS. We relied on 
officials to identify those IRS offices that use personal information 
because there is no central, coordinating point within IRS for receipt 
of this type of information. Additionally, we relied on IRS and 
Education officials' views on possible impediments or missed 
opportunities to match/cross-check information, any additional data 
sharing and verification needs, and the benefits and challenges of 
increased disclosure of taxpayer information.

We conducted our work from August 2002 through June 2003 in accordance 
with generally accepted government auditing standards.

[End of section]

Appendix II: Comments from the Internal Revenue Service:

COMMISSIONER:

DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE WASHINGTON, D.C. 
20224:

July 15, 2003:

Mr. Michael Brostek Director, Tax Issues United States General 
Accounting Office Washington, DC 20548:

Dear Mr. Brostek:

I have completed a review of the General Accounting Office (GAO) draft 
report titled, "Taxpayer Information: Increased Sharing and Verifying 
of Information Could Improve Education's Student Aid Award Decisions" 
(GAO-03-821, June 2003). The intent of the study was to determine 
whether:

1) The Department of Education (Education) uses taxpayer information to 
verify information provided by applicants for federal student financial 
aid and the benefits.

2) The IRS uses personal information maintained by Education to ensure 
that taxpayers meet their tax obligations and the benefits.

You determined that Education would benefit by receiving additional 
information from us; however, Internal Revenue Code Section 6103 would 
need to be modified to allow us to share additional information. As 
always, if the Congress chooses to amend the federal disclosure statue, 
we will implement it accordingly.

We agree that obtaining data from Education's student aid application 
would not benefit us because the information on the application is 
based on the tax return already in our possession.

In summary, although you did not make any recommendations for the IRS, 
your report provides an accurate and comprehensive review of this 
issue. It will be a good source document for policy-makers as they 
address the sharing of taxpayer information. If you have any questions, 
please contact David R. Williams,

Chief Communications and Liaison at (202) 622-5440.

Sincerely,

Mark W. Everson:

Signed by Mark W. Everson:

[End of section]

Appendix III: Comments from the Department of Education:

FEDERAL STUDENT AID:

CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER:

July 15, 2003:

Mr. Michael Brostek Director, Tax Issues Government Accounting Office 
Washington, D.C. 20548:

Dear Mr. Brostek:

Thank you for the opportunity to respond to your draft audit report 
entitled, "Taxpayer Information: Increased Sharing and Verifying of 
Information Could Improve Education's Student Aid Award Decisions" 
(GAD-03-821). I am responding on behalf of the Department.

The Title IV, Higher Education Act (HEA), programs play an important 
part in assisting millions of Americans each year in attaining their 
higher education goals. Ensuring the integrity of these programs --
getting the right amount of funds to eligible students at the right 
time --is a critical and primary goal of the Department.

As stated in your draft report, an effective data match of taxpayer 
information with the Internal Revenue Service has the potential to save 
hundreds of millions of dollars in overpayments each year. In addition, 
it would assist in reducing the amount of student aid received as a 
result of fraud.

Even though we estimate that the amount of overpayments in the Federal 
Pell Grant program is only a small percent of the disbursements, it 
still translates to well over $300 million each year. We are anxious to 
significantly reduce this amount and we continue to work with our 
counterparts in the Department of Treasury and the Office of Management 
and Budget to support the necessary legislative changes to do this.

Again, thank you for the opportunity to comment on the draft report.

Sincerely,

Theresa S. Shaw:

Signed by Theresa S. Shaw:

830 First Street, NE, Washington, D.C. 20202 1-800-4-FED-AID www. 
studentaid. ed. gov:

FOOTNOTES

[1] Taxpayer information includes all federal tax returns and return 
information. This may consist of an individual's name, Social Security 
number, address, wages, self-reported earnings, unearned income from 
interest and dividends, tax returns, and miscellaneous income 
statements. 

[2] Personal information is defined as all information associated with 
an individual and includes both identifying information (e.g., name, 
Social Security number, and E-mail address) and nonidentifying 
information (e.g., financial information, education, age, gender, and 
physical attributes). 

[3] Stafford loans consist of subsidized and unsubsidized loans. 
Subsidized loans are loans for which the federal government pays the 
interest costs while the student is in school. Unsubsidized loans are 
loans for which the student is responsible for paying all interest 
costs.

[4] Both graduate and undergraduate students receive Stafford loans 
while parents of dependent students receive PLUS loans.

[5] IRC Section 6103 (l)(13) temporarily permits IRS to disclose the 
taxpayer's identity information, filing status, and adjusted gross 
income to Education employees for use in establishing the appropriate 
ICR amount for an applicable student loan. In practice, disclosures for 
these purposes are only made with the taxpayer's consent under IRC 
Section 6103(c) because Education uses contractors to administer its 
ICR program and 6103(l)(13) prevents disclosure to contractors. The 
6103(l)(13) provision has an expiration date of September 30, 2003. 

[6] Unlike IRC Section 6103 (l)(13) disclosures, which may only be made to 
Education employees, IRC Section 6103(m)(4) disclosures can be made to 
contractors.

[7] Education determines who falls into that sample based on analyses 
of past years' data on the characteristics of those individuals who are 
most likely to commit errors on their applications. Education primarily 
focuses on selecting students who are eligible for federal grants. 

[8] Not all individuals selected for the 30 percent sample are required 
to provide copies of their tax returns. Some of these individuals are 
legitimately not required to file tax returns, and instead, provide the 
school with statements attesting to their nonfiling status and the 
amount and type of their untaxed income.

[9] Education has established a $400 tolerance level for the 
discrepancy amount.

[10] U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Policy, Report to 
Congress on Scope and Use of Taxpayer Confidentiality and Disclosure 
Provisions, Vol. I: Study of General Provisions (Washington, D.C.: 
October 2000).

[11] Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President 
of the United States, "Department of Education," Budget of the United 
States Government: Fiscal Year 2004 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 2003), http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/usbudget/
budget-fy2004/education.html (downloaded June 11, 2003).

[12] H.R. 1528, The Taxpayer Protection and IRS Accountability Act of 
2003, April 1, 2003.

[13] U.S. General Accounting Office, Benefit and Loan Programs: 
Improved Data Sharing Could Enhance Program Integrity, GAO/HEHS-00-119 
(Washington, D.C.: Sept. 13, 2000).

[14] GAO/HEHS-00-119.

[15] U.S. General Accounting Office, Major Management Challenges and 
Program Risks: Department of Education, GAO-03-99 (Washington, D.C.: 
January 2003).

[16] In general, if taxes remain unpaid after IRS gives appropriate 
notice and demand for payment, IRS is authorized by the IRC to use its 
enforcement authority in the form of a levy, seizure, or lien. The levy 
of assets such as bank accounts and wages that are in the possession of 
third parties, such as banks and employers, is referred to as a levy, 
and the levy of assets in the possession of the taxpayer is referred to 
as a seizure. A lien is a legal claim that attaches to property to 
secure the payment of a debt. The filing of a lien would prevent the 
taxpayer from selling an asset, with clear title, without payment of 
the tax debt. 

[17] IRS's Automated Underreporter Program is designed to identify wage 
earners who do not report all of their income on their tax returns. The 
program compares the income reported on their tax returns to the income 
reported by employers and other third-party sources on Forms W-2 and 
1099. 

[18] U.S. General Accounting Office, Reducing the Tax Gap: Results of a 
GAO-Sponsored Symposium, GAO/GGD-95-157 (Washington, D.C.: June 2, 
1995), and Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, 
Management Advisory Report: Comparing the Internal Revenue Service's 
Verification of Income for Wage Earners and Business Taxpayers, 
Reference No: 2001-30-166 (Washington, D.C.: September 2001).

GAO's Mission:

The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, 
exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability 
of the federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use 
of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides 
analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make 
informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO's commitment to 
good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, 
integrity, and reliability.

Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony:

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no 
cost is through the Internet. GAO's Web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains 
abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony and an 
expanding archive of older products. The Web site features a search 
engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You 
can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other 
graphics.

Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and 
correspondence. GAO posts this list, known as "Today's Reports," on its 
Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document 
files. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to 
www.gao.gov and select "Subscribe to e-mail alerts" under the "Order 
GAO Products" heading.

Order by Mail or Phone:

The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 
each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent 
of Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or 
more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. 
Orders should be sent to:

U.S. General Accounting Office

441 G Street NW,

Room LM Washington,

D.C. 20548:

To order by Phone: 	

	Voice: (202) 512-6000:

	TDD: (202) 512-2537:

	Fax: (202) 512-6061:

To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs:

Contact:

Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470:

Public Affairs:

Jeff Nelligan, managing director, NelliganJ@gao.gov (202) 512-4800 U.S.

General Accounting Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149 Washington, D.C.

20548:
