
[4830-01-u]
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
Internal Revenue Service
26 CFR Parts 40, 42, 48, and 602
[TD 8659]
RIN 1545-AR92
Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Excise Tax; Registration Requirements 
AGENCY:  Internal Revenue Service (IRS), Treasury.
ACTION:  Final regulations. 
SUMMARY:  This document contains final regulations relating to
the taxes on gasoline and diesel fuel.  This document also
removes obsolete excise tax regulations.  The regulations reflect
and implement certain changes made by the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1990 and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1993 (the 1993 Act).  The regulations affect certain
blenders, enterers, industrial users, refiners, terminal
operators, and throughputters.  The regulations also affect
certain persons that sell, buy, or use diesel fuel for a
nontaxable use.
EFFECTIVE DATE:  These regulations are effective [INSERT DATE
THIS DOCUMENT IS PUBLISHED IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER].  
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:  Frank Boland (202) 622-3130
(not a toll-free call). 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Paperwork Reduction Act
     The collections of information contained in these final 
regulations have been reviewed and approved by the Office of
Management and Budget in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction
Act (44 U.S.C. 3507) under control number 1545-1418.  Responses
to this collection of information are mandatory and are required
to obtain certain credits or payments.  
     An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not
required to respond to, a collection of information unless the
collection of information displays a valid control number. 
     The estimated average annual reporting burden per respondent
is .1 hour.
     Comments concerning the accuracy of this burden estimate and
suggestions for reducing this burden should be sent to the
Internal Revenue Service, Attn:  IRS Reports Clearance Officer,
PC:FP, Washington, DC 20224, and to the Office of Management and
Budget, Attn:  Desk Officer for the Department of the Treasury,
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Washington, DC
20503.
     Books and records relating to this collection of information
must be retained as long as their contents may become material in
the administration of any internal revenue law.  Generally, tax
returns and tax return information are confidential, as required
by 26 U.S.C. 6103. 
Background
     The diesel fuel regulations.  Before 1994, the diesel fuel
tax applied to sales of diesel fuel by importers or producers
(including registered wholesale distributors).  Because of
concerns that this system fostered considerable tax evasion,
Congress made significant changes to the tax in the 1993 Act. 
Effective January 1, 1994, tax is imposed on diesel fuel when it
is removed at the terminal rack, and diesel fuel may be removed
tax free only if the fuel contains a prescribed type and amount
of dye.  These changes made the taxing point readily
identifiable, required untaxed fuel to be physically identified
(that is, dyed), and reduced the number of taxpayers.
     Temporary regulations (TD 8496) relating to these changes
(the diesel fuel regulations) were published in the Federal
Register on November 30, 1993 (58 FR 63069), along with a notice
of proposed rulemaking (PS-52-93) cross-referencing the temporary
regulations (58 FR 63131).  Amendments to these temporary
regulations (TD 8512) relating to dye color and concentration
were published in the Federal Register on December 27, 1993 (58
FR 68304), along with a notice of proposed rulemaking (PS-76-93)
cross-referencing those amendments (58 FR 68338).  Written
comments responding to the proposed diesel fuel regulations were
received and a public hearing was held on March 22, 1994.  Final
regulations (TD 8550) relating to dye color and concentration
were published in the Federal Register on June 30, 1994 (59 FR
33656). 
     The conforming regulations.  On October 19, 1994, the IRS
published in the Federal Register (59 FR 52735) proposed
regulations (PS-66-93) that generally consolidate the rules
relating to the gasoline tax and the diesel fuel tax into a
single set of rules applicable to both fuels (the conforming
regulations).  The conforming regulations also proposed rules
relating to gasohol and compressed natural gas. 
     Written comments regarding the proposed conforming
regulations were received and a public hearing was held on
January 11, 1995. 
     Final regulations (TD 8609) relating to gasohol and
compressed natural gas were published in the Federal Register on
August 7, 1995 (60 FR 40079). 
     The final regulations.  After consideration of written
comments and comments made at the public hearings, the proposed
diesel fuel regulations and the proposed conforming regulations
are adopted as revised by this Treasury decision.  Comments and
revisions are discussed below. 
Significant Issues Raised in Comments and Changes Made in the
Final Regulations
Treatment of kerosene
     The temporary diesel fuel regulations provide that kerosene
would not be treated as diesel fuel before July 1, 1994, and
invited comments on the treatment of kerosene after June 30,
1994.  Notice 94-72 (1994-2 C.B. 553) informed taxpayers that the
IRS was reviewing this issue and would not change the treatment
of kerosene until the issuance of further guidance.  The IRS is
continuing its review of this issue.  Accordingly, the final
regulations do not treat kerosene as diesel fuel. 
     Because kerosene is not treated as diesel fuel, a person
that adds kerosene to diesel fuel outside of the bulk
transfer/terminal system generally must pay tax on the added
kerosene and must be registered by the IRS.
Removal from certain refineries
     The temporary diesel fuel regulations provide that tax is
not imposed on the removal of undyed diesel fuel from an approved
refinery for delivery to an approved terminal if the fuel is
removed by rail car, the refinery and the terminal are operated
by the same taxable fuel registrant, and the refinery is not
served by pipeline or vessel.
     One commentator noted that one of its refineries is not
serviced by pipeline, vessel, or rail.  In response to this
comment, the final regulations expand this rule so that diesel
fuel also may be removed tax free from an approved refinery that
is not served by pipeline, vessel, or rail if the removal is by a
trailer or semi-trailer and additional prescribed conditions are
met.
Notice relating to sales and removals of dyed diesel fuel
     The temporary diesel fuel regulations provide that terminal
operators and others who sell dyed diesel fuel are responsible
for informing their customers that the dyed fuel cannot be used
for a taxable purpose and that a penalty may be imposed for
taxable use (the notice requirement).  Any person that fails to
comply with the notice requirement is, for purposes of the
penalty for misuse of dyed fuel imposed by section 6714, presumed
to know that the dyed diesel fuel will not be used for a
nontaxable use. 
     Under the final regulations, only terminal operators and
certain retail sellers will be subject to the notice requirement. 
A terminal operator must comply with the notice requirement as
one of the terms and conditions of its registration. 
Visual inspection devices
     The temporary diesel fuel regulations do not require the use
of visual inspection devices and the final regulations continue
this policy.  The IRS will continue to evaluate the need for
regulations addressing this issue.  However, the use of visual
inspection devices is encouraged so that the buyers and sellers
of diesel fuel may readily determine whether the fuel may be used
for a taxable use.
Back-up tax; trains
     A tax is imposed on the delivery of dyed diesel fuel into
the fuel supply tank of a diesel-powered train.  Under the
temporary diesel fuel regulations, the operator of the train into
which dyed fuel is delivered is liable for the tax.
     Several commentators noted that a prevalent practice in the
railroad industry is for one railroad's locomotives to be used to
pull freight on another's track and to be fueled by the railroad
that owns the track.  In these situations, the identity of the
operator is unclear.
     In response to these comments, the final regulations provide
that the person that delivers dyed diesel fuel into the fuel
supply tank of a train is liable for the tax under certain
prescribed conditions. 
Credits and payments
     Information to be submitted with claims.  If undyed diesel
fuel is used in a nontaxable use, a credit or payment is
allowable to either (1) the ultimate purchaser or (2) in the case
of diesel fuel used on a farm for farming purposes or by a State
or local government, the registered ultimate vendor of the fuel. 
The temporary diesel fuel regulations prescribe the information
that must be submitted to the IRS to support claims for these
credits or payments.
     Several commentators asserted that the information
requirements in the diesel fuel temporary regulations are too
burdensome.  In response to these comments, the final regulations
reduce the paperwork requirements for claimants by eliminating
certain items from the list of required submissions.  However,
the paperwork requirements may be changed in the future if the
IRS determines that additional information is necessary for
effective enforcement of the tax. 
     Notice 94-61.  Notice 94-61 (1994-1 C.B. 371) announced that
the temporary diesel fuel regulations would be revised to clarify
that (1) a registered ultimate vendor is the only person allowed
a credit or payment with respect to diesel fuel used on a farm
for farming purposes or by State or local governments, and (2) a
credit or payment generally is allowed to a registered ultimate
vendor who sells undyed diesel fuel to a custom harvester for use
on a farm for farming purposes.  The final regulations contain
these revisions.
     Undyed diesel fuel mixed with dyed diesel fuel.  One
condition for the allowance of a credit or payment under section
6427 is that tax must have been imposed on the diesel fuel to
which the claim relates.  Because untaxed diesel fuel is dyed,
the temporary diesel fuel regulations require each claim to be
accompanied by a statement that the diesel fuel covered by a
claim did not contain visible evidence of dye. 
     On rare occasions, however, an amount of taxed diesel fuel
may contain visible evidence of dye.  This may occur, for
example, when dyed diesel fuel and undyed diesel fuel are mixed
together by a fuel marketer or user who accidentally delivers one
type of fuel into a storage tank that already contains the other
type of fuel.  
     The final regulations provide that each claim must be
accompanied by a statement that tax has been imposed on the
diesel fuel covered by a claim.  Generally, this requirement will
be met by a claimant's statement that the diesel fuel did not
contain visible evidence of dye.  However, for claims involving
taxed fuel that has been mixed with dyed fuel, the claimant (that
is, the ultimate purchaser or the registered ultimate vendor)
cannot make such a statement.  For these claims, the claimant
must submit other evidence showing that the diesel fuel covered
by the claim has been subject to tax.  This evidence might
include a statement from the person that produced the undyed/dyed
fuel mixture explaining how the mixing occurred or a statement
from the claimant (if the claimant did not produce the mixture)
that explains when and from whom the claimant acquired the
mixture.  As with all claims, these claims are subject to review
by the IRS before they are allowed. 
Section 6714 penalty
     Section 6714(a)(3) provides that if any person willfully
alters, or attempts to alter, the strength or composition of any
dye or marking done pursuant to section 4082 in any dyed fuel,
then such person shall pay a penalty in addition to the tax (if
any). 
     Notice 94-21 (1994-1 C.B. 339) describes three situations in
which the section 6714(a)(3) penalty does not apply.  The final
regulations incorporate the substance of the Notice.  In
addition, the final regulations provide that the section
6714(a)(3) penalty does not apply if dyed diesel fuel is blended
with undyed diesel fuel and the blending occurs as part of an
exempt or partially exempt (that is, bus or train) use.  Thus,
for example, the section 6714(a)(3) penalty does not apply if
dyed and undyed diesel fuel are blended together in the fuel
supply tank of a nonhighway vehicle such as a bulldozer or farm
tractor. 
Dye injection systems and markers
     The final regulations do not require the use of dye
injection systems or markers.  These topics will be addressed in
a future notice of proposed rulemaking. 
Effect on other documents
     The following publications are obsolete as of [INSERT DATE
OF PUBLICATION OF THIS DOCUMENT IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER]:
     Rev. Rul. 72-213, 1972-1 C.B. 328.
     Rev. Proc. 73-21, 1973-2 C.B. 471.
     Notice 88-26, 1988-1 C.B. 495.
     Notice 89-17, 1989-1 C.B. 647.
     Notice 94-18, 1994-1 C.B. 338.
     Notice 94-21, 1994-1 C.B. 339.
     Notice 94-61, 1994-1 C.B. 371.
     Notice 94-72, 1994-2 C.B. 553.
Special Analyses
     It has been determined that this Treasury decision is not a
significant regulatory action as defined in EO 12866.  Therefore,
a regulatory assessment is not required.  It also has been
determined that section 553(b) of the Administrative Procedure
Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 5) and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5
U.S.C. chapter 6) do not apply to these regulations, and,
therefore, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is not required.  
Pursuant to section 7805(f) of the Internal Revenue Code, the
notices of proposed rulemaking preceding these regulations were
submitted to the Small Business Administration for comment on
their impact on small business.
Drafting Information
     The principal author of these regulations is Frank Boland,
Office of Assistant Chief Counsel (Passthroughs and Special
Industries).  However, other personnel from the IRS and Treasury
Department participated in their development. 
List of Subjects
26 CFR Parts 40, 42, and 48
     Excise taxes, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
26 CFR Part 602
     Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
Adoption of Amendments to the Regulations
     Accordingly, under the authority of 26 U.S.C. 7805, chapter
1 is amended as follows:
PART 40--EXCISE TAX PROCEDURAL REGULATIONS
     Paragraph 1.  The authority citation for part 40 is amended
by removing the entry for sections 40.6011(a)-1, 40.6011(a)-2,
and 40.6011(a)-3T and adding entries in numerical order to read
in part as follows:
     Authority:  26 U.S.C. 7805 * * *
     Section 40.6011(a)-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 6011(a). 
     Section 40.6011(a)-2 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 
6011(a). * * *
     Par. 2.  Section 40.6011(a)-1(b) is amended by:
     1.  Redesignating the text of paragraph (b) following the
heading as paragraph (b)(1) and adding a heading for newly
designated paragraph (b)(1).
     2.  Adding paragraph (b)(2). 
     The additions read as follows: 
40.6011(a)-1 Returns. 
* * * * *
     (b) * * * (1) In general. * * *
     (2) Certain persons liable for tax on taxable fuel. 
Effective January 1, 1994, the district director may require a
person to make a return of tax for a monthly or semimonthly
period in the manner prescribed in paragraph (b)(1) of this
section if the person--
     (i) Is a bonded registrant (as defined in 48.4101-1(b) of
this chapter) at any time during the period; 
     (ii) Has been registered under section 4101 for less than
one year at the beginning of the period; 
     (iii) Meets the acceptable risk test of 48.4101-1(f)(3) of
this chapter by reason of 48.4101-1(f)(3)(i)(B) of this chapter
at any time during the period; 
     (iv) Has failed to comply with the applicable provisions of
48.4101-1(h) of this chapter (relating to the terms and
conditions of registration); 
     (v) Is liable for tax under 48.4082-4(a) of this chapter
(relating to the back-up tax on diesel fuel) at any time during
the period; or
     (vi) Is liable for tax under section 4081 (relating to the
tax on taxable fuel) at any time during the period and is not a
taxable fuel registrant at that time.
* * * * *
40.6011(a)-3T  [Removed]
     Par. 3.  Section 40.6011(a)-3T is removed.
PART 42--[REMOVED]
     Par. 4.  Part 42 is removed. 
PART 48--MANUFACTURERS AND RETAILERS EXCISE TAXES
     Par. 5.  The authority citation for part 48 is amended by
removing the entries for sections 48.4081-4, 48.4082-1 and
48.4082-2T, 48.4101-3T, 48.4101-4T, 48.6427-8T and 48.6427-9T,
and adding entries in numerical order to read in part as follows:
     Authority: 26 U.S.C. 7805 * * *
     Section 48.4081-4 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 
4083(a)(2). * * *
     Section 48.4082-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 4082. 
     Section 48.4082-2 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 4082. 
     Section 48.4101-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 4101(a).
     Section 48.4101-2 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 4101(d). * * *
     Section 48.6427-8 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 6427(n). 
     Section 48.6427-9 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 6427(n). 
     Par. 6.  Section 48.0-1 is amended by removing from the
fourth sentence the language "gasoline, diesel and aviation
fuel," and adding "taxable fuel, aviation fuel," in its place. 
48.4041-0T  [Removed]
     Par. 7.  Section 48.4041-0T is removed.
     Par. 8.  Section 48.4041-0 is added to read as follows:
48.4041-0 Applicability of regulations relating to diesel fuel
after December 31, 1993. 
     Sections 48.4041-3 through 48.4041-17 do not apply to sales
or uses of diesel fuel after December 31, 1993.  For rules
relating to the diesel fuel tax imposed by section 4041 after
that date, see 48.4082-4. 
48.4041-1 and 48.4041-2 [Removed]
     Par. 9.  Sections 48.4041-1 and 48.4041-2 are removed.
48.4041-2T  [Removed]
     Par. 10.  Section 48.4041-2T is removed. 
48.4041-21  [Amended]
48.4041-15 through 48.4041-21 [Transferred]
     Par. 11.  Sections 48.4041-15 through 48.4041-21 are
transferred from subpart G to subpart F. 
     Par. 12.  In the first sentence of 48.4041-21(c)(1), the
language "48.4082-4T(c)(1) through (5)(A) or (c)(6) through
(11)" is removed and "48.4082-4(c)(1) through (c)(4)(i) or
(c)(5) through (c)(10)" is added in its place. 
     Par. 13.  The heading for subpart G is revised to read as
follows:
Subpart G--Fuel Used on Inland Waterways
     Par. 14. Section 48.4042-1 is amended as follows:
     1.  Paragraphs (b) and (e) are revised. 
     2.  In the introductory text of paragraph (f)(1), the
language "(26)" is removed and "(27)" is added in its place. 
     3.  Paragraphs (g)(25) and (g)(26) are redesignated as
paragraphs (g)(26) and (g)(27), respectively, and a new paragraph
(g)(25) is added.
     The revisions and additions read as follows:
48.4042-1 Tax on fuel used in commercial waterway
transportation.
* * * * *
     (b) Amount of tax.  For the amount of tax, see section
4042(b).
* * * * *
     (e) Liquid fuel.  For purposes of the tax imposed under this
section, liquid fuel means any liquid fuel including gasoline,
diesel fuel, special motor fuel, or Bunker C residual fuel oil.
* * * * *
     (g) * * *
     (25) Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway:  From its confluence with
the Tennessee River to the Warrior River at Demopolis, Alabama. 
* * * * *
     Par. 15.  The heading for subpart H is revised to read as
follows:
Subpart H--Motor Vehicles, Tires, Tubes, Tread Rubber, and
Taxable Fuel

     Par. 16.  Section 48.4064-1(e)(2) is amended by removing the
language "Form 843" and adding "Form 8849 (or on such other form
as the Commissioner may designate)" in its place. 
     Par. 17.  The undesignated center heading preceding
48.4081-1 is revised to read as follows:
TAXABLE FUEL
     Par. 18.  Sections 48.4081-1, 48.4081-2 and 48.4081-3 are
revised to read as follows:
48.4081-1  Taxable fuel; definitions.
     (a) Overview.  This section provides definitions for
purposes of the tax on taxable fuel imposed by section 4081.  
     (b) Definitions. 
      Approved terminal or refinery means a terminal or refinery
that is operated, respectively, by a taxable fuel registrant that
is a terminal operator, or by a taxable fuel registrant that is a
refiner. 
     Blender means any person that produces blended taxable fuel.
     Bulk transfer means any transfer of taxable fuel by pipeline
or vessel.
     Bulk transfer/terminal system means the taxable fuel
distribution system consisting of refineries, pipelines, vessels,
and terminals.  Thus, taxable fuel in a refinery, pipeline,
vessel, or terminal is in the bulk transfer/terminal system. 
Taxable fuel in the fuel supply tank of any engine, or in any
tank car, rail car, trailer, truck, or other equipment suitable
for ground transportation is not in the bulk transfer/terminal
system.
     Bus means automobile bus. 
     Diesel-powered boat means any waterborne vessel of any size
or configuration that is propelled, in whole or in part, by a
diesel-powered engine.
     Diesel-powered bus means any bus that is propelled by a
diesel-powered engine. 
     Diesel-powered highway vehicle means a highway vehicle, as
defined in 48.4041-8(b), that is propelled by a diesel-powered
engine.
     Diesel-powered train means any diesel-powered equipment or
machinery that rides on rails.  Thus, for example, the term
includes a locomotive, work train, switching engine, and track
maintenance machine.
     Enterer generally means the importer of record (under
customs law) with respect to the taxable fuel.  However, if the
importer of record is acting as an agent (for example, the
importer of record is a customs broker engaged by the owner of
the taxable fuel), the person for whom the agent is acting is the
enterer.  If there is no importer of record for taxable fuel
entered into the United States, the owner of the taxable fuel at
the time it is brought into the United States is the enterer. 
     Entry of taxable fuel into the United States occurs when--
     (1) The taxable fuel is brought into the United States and
applicable customs law requires that the taxable fuel be entered
into the United States for consumption, use, or warehousing; or
     (2) The taxable fuel is brought into the United States from
Puerto Rico and applicable customs law would require that the
taxable fuel be entered into the United States for consumption,
use, or warehousing if the taxable fuel were brought into the
United States from somewhere other than Puerto Rico.
     Finished gasoline means all products (including gasohol (as
defined in 48.4081-6(b)(2))) that are commonly or commercially
known or sold as gasoline and are suitable for use as a motor
fuel, other than products that have an ASTM octane number of less
than 75 as determined by the motor method. 
     Gasoline means finished gasoline and gasoline blendstocks.
     Industrial user means any person that receives gasoline
blendstocks by bulk transfer for its own use in the manufacture
of any product other than finished gasoline.
     Position holder means, with respect to taxable fuel in a
terminal, the person that holds the inventory position in the
taxable fuel, as reflected on the records of the terminal
operator.  A person holds the inventory position in taxable fuel
when that person has a contractual agreement with the terminal
operator for the use of storage facilities and terminaling
services at a terminal with respect to the taxable fuel.  The
term also includes a terminal operator that owns taxable fuel in
its terminal. 
     Rack means a mechanism for delivering taxable fuel from a
refinery or terminal into a truck, trailer, railroad car, or
other means of nonbulk transfer. 
     Refiner means any person that owns, operates, or otherwise
controls a refinery.  
     Refinery means a facility used to produce taxable fuel from
crude oil, unfinished oils, natural gas liquids, or other
hydrocarbons and from which taxable fuel may be removed by
pipeline, by vessel, or at a rack.  However, the term does not
include a facility where only blended fuel or gasohol (as defined
in 48.4081-6(b)(2)), and no other type of taxable fuel, is
produced.  For this purpose blended fuel is any mixture that, if
produced outside the bulk transfer/terminal system, would be
blended taxable fuel. 
     Removal means any physical transfer of taxable fuel, and any
use of taxable fuel other than as a material in the production of
taxable fuel or special fuels (as defined in 48.4041-8(f)). 
However, taxable fuel is not removed when it evaporates or is
otherwise lost or destroyed.
     Sale means--
     (1) The transfer of title to, or substantial incidents of
ownership in, taxable fuel (other than taxable fuel in a
terminal) to the buyer for a consideration, which may consist of
money, services, or other property; or  
     (2) The transfer of the inventory position in the taxable
fuel in a terminal if the transferee becomes the position holder
with respect to the taxable fuel. 
     State includes any State, any political subdivision of a
State, the District of Columbia, the American Red Cross, and,
subject to the limitations of section 7871, any Indian tribal
government.  
     Taxable fuel means gasoline and diesel fuel. 
     Taxable fuel registrant means an enterer, industrial user,
refiner, terminal operator, or throughputter that is registered
under section 4101. 
     Terminal means a taxable fuel storage and distribution
facility that is supplied by pipeline or vessel, and from which
taxable fuel may be removed at a rack.  However, the term does
not include any facility at which gasoline blendstocks are used
in the manufacture of products other than finished gasoline and
from which no gasoline is removed.
     Terminal operator means any person that owns, operates, or
otherwise controls a terminal.
     Throughputter means any person that--
     (1) Owns taxable fuel within the bulk transfer/terminal
system (other than in a terminal); or  
     (2) Is a position holder. 
     Vessel means a waterborne taxable fuel transporting vessel.
     (c) Blended taxable fuel, diesel fuel, and gasoline
blendstocks; definitions--(1) Blended taxable fuel--(i) In
general.  Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(1)(ii) and
(c)(iii) of this section, blended taxable fuel means any mixture
that is produced outside the bulk transfer/terminal system and
that consists of--
     (A) Taxable fuel with respect to which tax has been imposed
under section 4041(a)(1) or 4081(a); and
     (B) Any other liquid on which tax has not been imposed under
section 4081.
     (ii) Exclusion; minor blending.  A mixture described in
paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section is not blended taxable fuel
if, during the calendar quarter in which the blender removes or
sells the mixture, all such mixtures removed or sold by the
blender contain, in the aggregate, less than 400 gallons of
liquid described in paragraph (c)(1)(i)(B) of this section. 
     (iii) Exclusion; gasohol.  Blended taxable fuel does not
include any gasohol (as defined in 48.4081-6(b)(2)) if,
disregarding the alcohol, the gasohol is not blended taxable fuel
and contains, in addition to permitted amounts of liquids
described in paragraph (c)(1)(i)(B) of this section, only
gasoline with respect to which--
     (A) Tax was imposed under section 4081(a) at a rate
described in 48.4081-6(e) (relating to the gasohol production
tax rate and the gasohol tax rate); or 
     (B) A valid claim is made under section 6427(f).
     (2) Diesel fuel.  (i) Effective April 1, 1996, diesel fuel
means any liquid (other than gasoline) that, without further
processing or blending, is suitable for use as a fuel in a
diesel-powered highway vehicle, diesel-powered train, or diesel-
powered boat.  However, diesel fuel does not include kerosene,
No. 5 and No. 6 fuel oils (as described in ASTM Specification D
396, which may be obtained from the American Society for Testing
and Materials, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 
19428), or F-76 (Fuel Naval Distillate MIL-F-16884, which may be
obtained from Standardization Document Order Desk, Building 4,
Section D, 700 Robbins Avenue, Philadelphia, PA  19111).
     (ii) Before April 1, 1996, diesel fuel means any liquid
(other than kerosene) that is commonly or commercially known or
sold as a fuel that is suitable for use in a diesel-powered
highway vehicle, diesel-powered train, or diesel-powered boat.  A
liquid meets this requirement if, without further processing or
blending, the liquid has practical and commercial fitness for use
in the propulsion engine of the highway vehicle, train, or boat. 
A liquid may possess this practical and commercial fitness even
though the specified use is not the liquid's predominant use. 
However, a liquid does not possess this practical and commercial
fitness solely by reason of its possible or rare use as a fuel in
the propulsion engine of a highway vehicle, train, or boat.
     (iii) Cross reference.  For the tax on blended taxable fuel,
see 48.4081-3(g).  For the back-up tax on certain uses of
liquids other than diesel fuel, see 48.4082-4.  
     (3) Gasoline blendstocks--(i) In general.  Except as
provided in paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, gasoline
blendstocks means--
     (A) Alkylate;
     (B) Butane;
     (C) Butene;
     (D) Catalytically cracked gasoline;
     (E) Coker gasoline;
     (F) Ethyl tertiary butyl ether (ETBE); 
     (G) Hexane;
     (H) Hydrocrackate;
     (I) Isomerate;
     (J) Methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE);
     (K) Mixed xylene (not including any separated isomer of
xylene);
     (L) Natural gasoline;
     (M) Pentane;
     (N) Pentane mixture;
     (0) Polymer gasoline;
     (P) Raffinate;
     (Q) Reformate;
     (R) Straight-run gasoline;
     (S) Straight-run naphtha;
     (T) Tertiary amyl methyl ether (TAME);
     (U) Tertiary butyl alcohol (gasoline grade) (TBA);
     (V) Thermally cracked gasoline;
     (W) Toluene; and
     (X) Transmix containing gasoline.
     (ii) Exclusion.  Gasoline blendstocks does not include any
product that cannot, without further processing, be used in the
production of finished gasoline.  For example, a mixed
hydrocarbon stream that is produced in a natural gas processing
plant is not a gasoline blendstock if the stream cannot be used
to produce finished gasoline without further processing. 
     (d) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994. 
48.4081-2  Taxable fuel; tax on removal at a terminal rack.
     (a) Overview.  This section provides the general rule that
all removals of taxable fuel at a terminal rack are subject to
tax and the position holder with respect to the fuel is liable
for the tax. 
     (b) Imposition of tax.  Except as provided in 48.4081-4
(relating to gasoline blendstocks) and 48.4082-1 (relating to
dyed diesel fuel), tax is imposed on the removal of taxable fuel
from a terminal if the taxable fuel is removed at the rack.  
     (c) Liability for tax--(1) In general.  The position holder
with respect to the taxable fuel is liable for the tax imposed
under paragraph (b) of this section.
     (2) Joint and several liability of terminal operator;
unregistered position holder--(i) In general.  The terminal
operator is jointly and severally liable for the tax imposed
under paragraph (b) of this section if--
     (A) The position holder with respect to the taxable fuel is
a person other than the terminal operator and is not a taxable
fuel registrant; and
     (B) The terminal operator has not met the conditions of
paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section. 
     (ii) Conditions for avoidance of liability.  A terminal
operator is not liable for tax under this paragraph (c)(2) if, at
the time of the removal, the terminal operator--
     (A) Is a taxable fuel registrant;
     (B) Has an unexpired notification certificate (as described
in 48.4081-5) from the position holder; and
     (C) Has no reason to believe that any information in the
notification certificate is false.
     (3) Joint and several liability of terminal operator;
incorrect information provided.  The terminal operator is jointly
and severally liable for the tax imposed under paragraph (b) of
this section if, in connection with the removal of diesel fuel
that is not dyed and marked in accordance with 48.4082-1, the
terminal operator provides any person (including the position
holder with respect to the fuel) with any bill of lading,
shipping paper, record, or similar document indicating that the
diesel fuel is dyed and marked in accordance with 48.4082-1. 
     (4) Example.  The following example illustrates this
paragraph (c) and 48.4082-1:

     Example.  (i) TO is a terminal operator and PH is the
position holder with respect to, and owner of, 8,000 gallons of
diesel fuel stored in TO's terminal.  TO and PH are taxable fuel
registrants.  When the fuel is removed from the terminal at the
rack, the fuel is not dyed and marked in accordance with
48.4082-1, and TO does not provide any person with any paperwork
indicating that the fuel is dyed and marked.  After the removal
from the terminal, PH sells the fuel to individuals for use as
heating oil, a nontaxable use.

     (ii) Because PH is the position holder of the fuel at the
time of the removal from the terminal, PH is liable for the tax
imposed by section 4081.  The removal is subject to tax because
the fuel is not dyed and marked in accordance with 48.4082-1,
and later use of the fuel in a nontaxable use does not make the
removal from the terminal exempt from tax. 

     (iii) Because PH is a taxable fuel registrant and TO did not
provide any person with any paperwork indicating that the fuel is
dyed and marked, TO is not jointly and severally liable for tax
under paragraph (c)(2) or (3) of this section.  
     (d) Rate of tax.  For the rate of tax generally, see section
4081(a).  For the rate of tax on gasohol and on gasoline removed
for gasohol production, see 48.4081-6. 
     (e) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994. 
48.4081-3  Taxable fuel; taxable events other than removal at
the terminal rack. 
     (a) Overview.  Although tax is imposed when taxable fuel is
removed from the terminal at the rack, tax also is imposed in
certain other situations described in this section.  For the
back-up tax on the use of dyed diesel fuel, see 48.4082-4. 
     (b) Tax on removal from a refinery--(1) Imposition of tax. 
Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section (relating
to an exemption for certain refineries), 48.4081-4 (relating to
gasoline blendstocks), and 48.4082-1 (relating to dyed diesel
fuel), tax is imposed on the following removals from a refinery:
     (i) A removal by bulk transfer if the refiner or the owner
of the taxable fuel immediately before the removal is not a
taxable fuel registrant. 
     (ii) A removal at the rack.
     (iii) After September 30, 1995, a removal of a batch of
gasohol from an approved refinery by bulk transfer if the refiner
treats itself with respect to the removal as a person that is not
registered under section 4101.  See 48.4101-1(a).  For the rule
providing that no deposit is required in the case of the tax
imposed under this paragraph (b)(1)(iii), see 40.6302(c)-1(e)(4)
of this chapter.  For the rule allowing inspections of facilities
where gasohol is produced, see section 4083. 
     (2) Exception for certain refineries.  The tax imposed under
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section does not apply to a removal
of taxable fuel if--
     (i) The taxable fuel is removed from an approved refinery
that is not served by pipeline (other than a pipeline for the
receipt of crude oil) or vessel; 
     (ii) The taxable fuel is received at a facility that is
operated by a taxable fuel registrant and is located within the
bulk transfer/terminal system; 
     (iii) The removal from the refinery is by--
     (A) Rail car; or
     (B) In the case of diesel fuel, a trailer or semi-trailer
that is used exclusively for the transport service described in
paragraphs (b)(2)(i) and (b)(2)(ii) of this section; 
     (iv) In the case of taxable fuel removed by rail car, the
facility at which the fuel is received is operated by the same
person that operates the refinery from which the fuel was
removed; and
     (v) In the case of diesel fuel removed by a trailer or semi-
trailer, the facility at which the fuel is received is less than
20 miles from the refinery from which the diesel fuel was
removed. 
     (3) Liability for tax.  The refiner is liable for the tax
imposed under paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
     (c) Tax on entry into the United States--(1) Imposition of
tax.  Except as provided in 48.4081-4 (relating to gasoline
blendstocks) and 48.4082-1 (relating to dyed diesel fuel), a tax
is imposed on the entry of taxable fuel into the United States
if--
     (i) The entry is by bulk transfer and the enterer is not a
taxable fuel registrant; or
     (ii) The entry is not by bulk transfer.
     (2) Liability for tax.  The enterer is liable for the tax
imposed under paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
     (d) Tax on bulk transfers from a terminal by an unregistered
position holder--(1) Imposition of tax.  A tax is imposed on the
removal by bulk transfer of taxable fuel from a terminal if the
position holder with respect to the taxable fuel is not a taxable
fuel registrant.
     (2) Liability for tax--(i) In general.  The position holder
with respect to the taxable fuel is liable for the tax imposed
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
     (ii) Joint and several liability of terminal operator.  The
terminal operator is jointly and severally liable for the tax
imposed under paragraph (d)(1) of this section if--
     (A) The position holder with respect to the taxable fuel is
a person other than the terminal operator; and
     (B) The terminal operator has not met the conditions of
paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section. 
     (iii) Conditions for avoidance of liability.  A terminal
operator is not liable for tax under this paragraph (d)(2) if, at
the time of the bulk transfer, the terminal operator-- 
     (A) Is a taxable fuel registrant;
     (B) Has an unexpired notification certificate (described in
48.4081-5) from the position holder; and
     (C) Has no reason to believe that any information in the
notification certificate is false.
     (e) Tax on bulk transfers not received at an approved
terminal or refinery--(1) Imposition of tax.  Except as provided
in 48.4081-4 (relating to gasoline blendstocks) and 48.4082-1
(relating to dyed diesel fuel), a tax on taxable fuel is imposed
if--
     (i) Taxable fuel is removed by bulk transfer from a refinery
or terminal, or entered by bulk transfer into the United States;
     (ii) No tax was imposed on such removal or entry under
paragraph (b), (c), or (d) of this section; and
     (iii) Upon removal from the pipeline or vessel, the taxable
fuel is not received at an approved terminal or refinery (or at
another pipeline or vessel).
     (2) Liability for tax--(i) In general.  The owner of the
taxable fuel when it is removed from the pipeline or vessel is
liable for the tax imposed under paragraph (e)(1) of this section
if the owner has not met the conditions of paragraph (e)(2)(ii)
of this section. 
     (ii) Conditions for avoidance of liability.  An owner of
taxable fuel is not liable for tax under paragraph (e)(2)(i) of
this section if, at the time the taxable fuel is removed from the
pipeline or vessel, the owner of the taxable fuel--
     (A) Is a taxable fuel registrant;
     (B) Has an unexpired notification certificate (described in
48.4081-5) from the operator of the terminal or refinery where
the taxable fuel is received; and
     (C) Has no reason to believe that any information in the
notification certificate is false. 
     (iii) Liability of the operator of the facility where the
taxable fuel is received.  The operator of the facility where the
taxable fuel is received is liable for the tax imposed under
paragraph (e)(1) of this section if the owner of the taxable fuel
has met the conditions of paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section
and is jointly and severally liable for the tax if the owner has
not met such conditions. 
     (f) Tax on sales within the bulk transfer/terminal
system--(1) Imposition of tax.  Except as provided in paragraph
(f)(2) of this section and 48.4082-1 (relating to dyed diesel
fuel), a tax is imposed on the sale of taxable fuel located
within the bulk transfer/terminal system if the sale is to a
person that is not a taxable fuel registrant and tax has not been
imposed on such taxable fuel under 48.4081-2, or paragraph (b),
(c), (d), or (e) of this section. 
     (2) Exception for certain sales of taxable fuel for export. 
The tax imposed under paragraph (f)(1) of this section does not
apply to a sale of taxable fuel if--
     (i) The buyer's principal place of business is not within
the United States;
     (ii) The sale of the fuel occurs as the fuel is delivered
into a transport vessel;
     (iii) The vessel has a capacity of at least 20,000 barrels
of fuel;
     (iv) The seller is a taxable fuel registrant and the
exporter of record of the fuel; and
     (v) The fuel was exported in due course. 
     (3) Liability for tax--(i) In general.  The seller of the
taxable fuel is liable for the tax imposed under paragraph (f)(1)
of this section if the seller has not met the conditions of
paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section.
     (ii) Conditions for avoidance of liability.  A seller is not
liable for tax under paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section if, at
the time of the sale, the seller--
     (A) Is a taxable fuel registrant;
     (B) Has an unexpired notification certificate (described in
48.4081-5) from the buyer; and
     (C) Has no reason to believe that any information in the
certificate is false.
     (iii) Liability of the buyer.  The buyer of the taxable fuel
is liable for the tax imposed under paragraph (f)(1) of this
section if the seller of the taxable fuel has met the conditions
of paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section and is jointly and
severally liable for the tax if the seller has not met such
conditions. 
     (4) Example.  The following example illustrates this
paragraph (f) and the definition of the term sale in 48.4081-1:
     Example.  PH owns one million gallons of untaxed gasoline
that is stored in TO's terminal.  PH also is the position holder
with respect to the gasoline.  While the gasoline remains stored
in the terminal, PH transfers title to 200,000 gallons of the
gasoline to A, a person that is not a taxable fuel registrant. 
PH continues to hold the inventory position on TO's records with
respect to the one million gallons.  Because PH continues as the
position holder with respect to the gasoline, the transfer of
title to the gasoline from PH to A is not a sale of gasoline. 
Because this transfer of title from PH to A is not a sale of
gasoline, the tax imposed under paragraph (f) of this section
does not apply to the transfer.  
     (g) Tax on removal or sale of blended taxable fuel by the
blender--(1) Imposition of tax.  A tax is imposed on the removal
or sale of blended taxable fuel by the blender thereof.  Tax is
computed on the difference between the total number of gallons of
blended taxable fuel removed or sold and the number of gallons of
previously taxed taxable fuel used to produce the blended taxable
fuel.  For this purpose, the alcohol in gasohol is treated as
previously taxed taxable fuel. 
     (2) Liability for tax.  The blender is liable for the tax
imposed under paragraph (g)(1) of this section.
     (3) Example.  The following example illustrates the
provisions of this paragraph (g) and the definition of the term
blended taxable fuel in 48.4081-1(c):
     Example.  (i) X, a gasoline wholesale distributor, buys
9,500 gallons of gasoline at a terminal rack.  The gasoline is
delivered into a tank trailer.  The position holder is liable for
tax under 48.4081-2 when the gasoline is removed at the rack.  X
then goes to another location where 500 gallons of alcohol (a
substance not subject to tax under section 4081) are delivered
into the tank trailer already containing the 9,500 gallons of
gasoline.  The gasoline and alcohol are splash blended as X
drives to X's retail service station where X pumps the blended
gasoline into a storage tank for sale to consumers.

     (ii) X is a blender within the meaning of 48.4081-1 because
X has produced blended taxable fuel, as defined in 48.4081-1, by
mixing the 9,500 gallons of gasoline on which tax has been
imposed under 48.4081-2(b) with 500 gallons of alcohol, a
substance not subject to tax under section 4081.  The 10,000
gallon mixture is not gasohol because it does not satisfy the
alcohol-content requirement described in 48.4081-6(b)(2).  X,
the blender, is liable for the tax imposed under this paragraph
(g) on the blended gasoline.  The tax is imposed when the blended
gasoline is removed from the tank trailer at the retail station. 
Tax on the blended mixture is computed on 500 gallons, the number
of gallons not previously subject to tax under section 4081.
     (h) Rate of tax.  For the rate of tax generally imposed
under this section, see section 4081(a).  For the rate of tax on
gasohol and on gasoline removed or entered for gasohol
production, see 48.4081-6.
     (i) Effective date.  This section is effective
January 1, 1994.  
     Par. 19.  Section 48.4081-4 is amended as follows:
     1.  The heading for 48.4081-4 is revised. 
     2.  In paragraph (a), the language "to produce gasoline" is
removed and "to produce finished gasoline" is added in its place.
     3.  In paragraph (b)(1)(i), the language "gasoline
registrant" is removed and "taxable fuel registrant" is added in
its place.
     4.  In paragraph (b)(1)(ii), the language "gasoline (as
defined in 48.4081-1(i)(1))" is removed and "finished gasoline"
is added in its place.
     5.  In paragraphs (b)(2)(i) and (c)(1), the language
"gasoline registrant" is removed each place it appears and
"taxable fuel registrant" is added in its place.
     6.  The language "and" is added following the semicolon at
the end of paragraph (c)(2).
     7.  Paragraph (c)(3) is revised.
     8.  Paragraph (c)(4) is removed.
     9.  In paragraph (d), the language "gasoline registrant" is
removed and "taxable fuel registrant" is added in its place.
     10.  In paragraphs (e)(2) and (e)(3), the language
"production of gasoline" is removed each place it appears and
"production of finished gasoline" is added in its place. 
     11.  In paragraph (e)(3), the language "to produce gasoline"
is removed each place it appears, and "to produce finished
gasoline" is added in its place. 
     12.  In paragraph (f), the language "1993" is removed and
"1994" is added in its place.
     The revisions read as follows: 
48.4081-4  Gasoline; special rules for gasoline blendstocks.
* * * * *
     (c)  * * *
     (3) Has no reason to believe that any information in the
certificate is false. 
* * * * *
     Par. 20.  Section 48.4081-5 is amended as follows:
     1.  The heading for 48.4081-5 is revised to read as
follows:  
48.4081-5  Taxable fuel; notification certificate of taxable
fuel registrant.
     2.  In paragraph (a), the first sentence in paragraph (b)(1)
introductory text, and paragraph (b)(2), the language "gasoline"
is removed each place it appears and "taxable fuel" is added in
its place.
     3.  In paragraph (b)(3), the language "or letter of
registration" is added after "Form 637" in the heading and after
"(Form 637)" in the text. 
     4.  In paragraph (c), the language "1993" is removed and
"1994" is added in its place.
     Par. 21.  The heading for 48.4081-6 is revised to read as
follows:  
48.4081-6 Gasoline; gasohol. 
40.4081-7  [Amended]
     Par. 22.  Section 48.4081-7 is amended as follows: 
     1.  In paragraph (c)(2), two new listings are added at the
end of the listings in line 5 of the taxpayer's report:

     "_________________Removal at the terminal rack
      _________________Removal or sale by the blender" 
     2.  In paragraph (c)(4)(i)(A) and the first sentence of
paragraph (c)(4)(iii), the language "48.4081-1(r))" is removed
and "48.4081-1))" is added in its place. 
     Par. 23.  Section 48.4081-8 is revised to read as follows:
48.4081-8  Taxable fuel; measurement. 
     (a) In general.  For purposes of the tax imposed by section
4081, gallons of taxable fuel may be measured on the basis of--
     (1) Actual volumetric gallons;
     (2) Gallons adjusted to 60 degrees Fahrenheit; or
     (3) Any other temperature adjustment method approved by the
Commissioner. 
     (b) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994.
48.4081-10T, 48.4081-11T, and 48.4081-12T  [Removed]
     Par. 24.  Sections 48.4081-10T through 48.4081-12T are
removed.
     Par. 25.  Section 48.4082-1 is revised to read as follows:
48.4082-1  Diesel fuel tax; exemption. 
     (a) Exemption.  Tax is not imposed by section 4081 on the
removal, entry, or sale of any diesel fuel if--
     (1) The person otherwise liable for tax is a taxable fuel
registrant;
     (2) In the case of a removal from a terminal, the terminal
is an approved terminal; and
     (3) The diesel fuel satisfies the dyeing and marking
requirements of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section. 
     (b) Dyeing requirements.  Diesel fuel satisfies the dyeing
requirement of this paragraph (b) only if it contains--
     (1) The dye Solvent Red 164 (and no other dye) at a
concentration spectrally equivalent to at least 3.9 pounds of the
solid dye standard Solvent Red 26 per thousand barrels of diesel
fuel; or 
     (2) Any dye of a type and in a concentration that has been
approved by the Commissioner. 
     (c) Marking requirements. [Reserved]
     (d) Time for adding the dye and marker.  [Reserved]
     (e) Effective date.  This section is effective [INSERT DATE
THIS DOCUMENT IS PUBLISHED IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER].
48.4082-2T, 48.4082-3T, 48.4082-4T and 48.4083  [Removed]
     Par. 26.  Sections 48.4082-2T, 48.4082-3T, 48.4082-4T, and
48.4083 are removed.
     Par. 27.  Sections 48.4082-2, 48.4082-3, 48.4082-4, and
48.4083-1 are added to read as follows:
48.4082-2 Diesel fuel tax; notice required with respect to dyed
diesel fuel.
     (a) In general.  A legible and conspicuous notice stating: 
DYED DIESEL FUEL, NONTAXABLE USE ONLY, PENALTY FOR TAXABLE USE
must be posted by a seller on any retail pump or other delivery
facility where it sells dyed diesel fuel for use by its buyer. 
Any seller that fails to post the required notice on any retail
pump or other delivery facility where it sells dyed diesel fuel
is, for purposes of the penalty imposed by section 6714, presumed
to know that the fuel will not be used for a nontaxable use. 
     (b) Cross reference; terminal operators.  For the
requirement that terminal operators provide a notice with respect
to dyed diesel fuel, see 48.4101-1(h)(3) (relating to terms and
conditions of registration for terminal operators).
     (c) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994.
48.4082-3 Diesel fuel; visual inspection devices. [Reserved] 
48.4082-4 Diesel fuel; back-up tax. 
     (a) Imposition of tax--(1) In general.  Tax is imposed by
section 4041 on the delivery into the fuel supply tank of the
propulsion engine of a diesel-powered highway vehicle (other than
a diesel-powered bus) or diesel-powered boat of--
     (i) Any diesel fuel on which tax has not been imposed by
section 4081; 
     (ii) Any diesel fuel on which a credit or payment has been
allowed under section 6427; or
     (iii) Any liquid other than gasoline or diesel fuel.
     (2) Liability for tax--(i) In general.  The operator of the
highway vehicle or boat into which the fuel is delivered is
liable for the tax imposed under paragraph (a)(1) of this
section.
     (ii) Joint and several liability of the seller.  The seller
of the fuel is jointly and severally liable for the tax imposed
under paragraph (a)(1) of this section if the seller knows or has
reason to know that the fuel will not be used in a nontaxable
use. 
     (3) Rate of tax.  The rate of tax is the rate imposed on
diesel fuel by section 4081(a).
     (b) Tax on diesel fuel; buses and trains--(1) In general. 
Tax is imposed by section 4041 on the delivery into the fuel
supply tank of the propulsion engine of a diesel-powered bus or a
diesel-powered train of--
     (i) Any diesel fuel on which tax has not been imposed by
section 4081; 
     (ii) Any diesel fuel on which a credit or payment has been
allowed under section 6427; or
     (iii) Any liquid other than gasoline or diesel fuel.
     (2) Liability for tax--(i) In general.  Except as provided
in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, the operator of the bus
or train into which the fuel is delivered is liable for the tax
imposed under paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
     (ii) Special rule for certain train operators.  The person
that delivers the fuel into the fuel supply tank of a train,
rather than the train operator, is liable for the tax imposed
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section if, at the time of the
delivery--
     (A) The deliverer of the fuel and the operator of the train
are both registered as train operators under 48.4101-1; and
     (B) A written agreement between the deliverer of the fuel
and the operator requires the deliverer to pay the tax imposed
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section. 
     (3) Rate of tax--(i) Buses--(A) In general.  The rate of tax
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section is the sum of the rates
described in sections 4041(a)(1)(C)(iii)(I) and 4041(d)(1) (the
bus rate) if the bus is used to furnish (for compensation)
passenger land transportation available to the general public and
either such transportation is scheduled and along regular routes
or the seating capacity of the bus is at least 20 adults (not
including the driver).  A bus is available to the general public
if the bus is available for hire to more than a limited number of
persons, groups, or organizations.  
     (B) Other uses.  The rate of tax under paragraph (b)(1) of
this section is the rate of tax imposed on diesel fuel by section
4081(a) if the bus is used for a purpose other than that
described in paragraph (b)(3)(i)(A) of this section. 
     (ii) Trains.  The rate of tax under paragraph (b)(1) of this
section is the rate prescribed in section 4041 for diesel fuel
sold for use in a train (the train rate). 
     (4) Cross reference.  For the registration requirement
relating to certain bus and train operators, see 48.4101-
1(c)(2).
     (c) Exemptions.  The taxes imposed under paragraphs (a) and
(b) of this section do not apply to a delivery of any liquid    
for--
     (1) Use on a farm for farming purposes as that term and
related terms are defined in 48.6420-4(a) through (g); 
     (2) The exclusive use of a State;
     (3) Use described in section 4041(h) (relating to use in a
vehicle owned by an aircraft museum);
     (4) Use in a boat employed in--
     (i) The business of commercial fishing;
     (ii) The business of transporting persons or property for
compensation or hire; or 
     (iii) Any other trade or business, unless the boat is used
in any activity of a type generally considered to constitute
entertainment, amusement, or recreation (within the meaning of
section 274(a)(1)(A) and the regulations under that section);
     (5) Use in a bus while the bus is engaged in the
transportation of students and employees of schools (as defined
in the last sentence of section 4221(d)(7)(C));
     (6) Use in a qualified local bus (as defined in section
6427(b)(2)(D)) while the bus is engaged in furnishing (for
compensation) intracity passenger land transportation that is
available to the general public and is scheduled and along
regular routes; 
     (7) Use in a highway vehicle that--
     (i) Is not registered (and is not required to be registered)
for highway use under the laws of any State or foreign country;
and
     (ii) Is used in the operator's trade or business or in an
activity of the operator described in section 212 (relating to
the production of income);
     (8) The exclusive use of a nonprofit educational
organization, as defined in 48.4221-6(b);
     (9) Use in a highway vehicle that is owned by the United
States and is not used on the highway; or
     (10) Use in any boat operated by the United States for the
exclusive use of the United States or any vessel of war of any
foreign nation, as described in 48.4221-4(b)(5).
     (d) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994. 
48.4083-1 Taxable fuel; administrative authority.
     (a) In general--(1) Authority to inspect.  Officers or
employees of the IRS designated by the Commissioner, upon
presenting appropriate credentials and a written notice to the
owner, operator, or agent in charge, are authorized to enter any
place and to conduct inspections in accordance with paragraphs
(a) through (c) of this section.
     (2) Reasonableness.  Inspections will be performed in a
reasonable manner and at times that are reasonable under the
circumstances, taking into consideration the normal business
hours of the place to be entered.
     (b) Place of inspection--(1) In general.  Inspections may be
at any place at which taxable fuel is (or may be) produced or
stored or at any inspection site where evidence of activities
described in section 6714(a) may be discovered.  These places may
include, but are not limited to--
     (i) Any terminal;
     (ii) Any fuel storage facility that is not a terminal;
     (iii) Any retail fuel facility; or
     (iv) Any designated inspection site.
     (2) Designated inspection sites.  A designated inspection
site is any State highway inspection station, weigh station,
agricultural inspection station, mobile station, or other
location designated by the Commissioner to be used as a fuel
inspection site.  A designated inspection site will be identified
as a fuel inspection site.
     (c) Scope of inspection--(1) Inspection.  Officers or
employees may physically inspect, examine or otherwise search any
tank, reservoir, or other container that can or may be used for
the production, storage, or transportation of fuel, fuel dyes, or
fuel markers.  Inspection may also be made of any equipment used
for, or in connection with, production, storage, or
transportation of fuel, fuel dyes, or fuel markers.  This
includes any equipment used for the dyeing or marking of fuel. 
This also includes books and records, if any, that are maintained
at the place of inspection and are kept to determine excise tax
liability under section 4081. 
     (2) Detainment.  Officers or employees may detain any
vehicle, train, or boat for the purpose of inspecting its fuel
tanks and storage tanks.  Detainment will be either on the
premises under inspection or at a designated inspection site. 
Detainment may continue for such reasonable period of time as is
necessary to determine the amount and composition of the fuel.
     (3) Removal of samples.  Officers or employees may take and
remove samples of fuel in such quantities as are reasonably
necessary to determine the composition of the fuel.
     (d) Refusal to submit to inspection--(1) Imposition of
penalty.  Any person that refuses to allow an inspection will be
fined $1,000 for each refusal.  This penalty is in addition to
any other penalty or tax that may be imposed upon that person or
any other person liable for tax under section 4081 or penalty
under section 6714.
     (2) Assessment of penalty.  This penalty is an assessable
penalty and is assessed in accordance with section 6671.
     (e) Effective date.  This section is effective
January 1, 1994.
     Par. 28.  The undesignated center heading preceding
48.4101-1 is removed. 
     Par. 29.  Section 48.4101-1 is revised to read as follows:
48.4101-1 Registration.
     (a) In general.  (1) This section provides rules relating to
registration under section 4101 for purposes of the federal
excise tax on taxable fuel imposed by sections 4041(a)(1) and
4081 and the credit or payment allowed to registered ultimate
vendors of diesel fuel under section 6427.  
     (2) A person is registered under section 4101 only if the
district director has issued a registration letter to the person
and the registration has not been revoked or suspended.  
     (3) A refiner that is registered under section 4101 may,
with respect to the bulk removal of any batch of gasohol from its
refinery, treat itself as a person that is not registered.  See
48.4081-3(b)(1)(iii). 
     (4) Each business unit that has, or is required to have, a
separate employer identification number is treated as a separate
person.  Thus, two business units (for example, a parent
corporation and a subsidiary corporation, or a proprietorship and
a related partnership), each of which has a different employer
identification number, are two persons.
     (5) A registration in effect on December 31, 1993, with
respect to the tax on gasoline or diesel fuel is subject to the
district director's review, and to revocation or suspension,
under the standards set forth in this section, but remains in
effect until the earlier of--
     (i) The effective date of a registration issued under
paragraph (g)(3) of this section; or
     (ii) The effective date of the revocation or suspension of
the registration under paragraph (i) of this section.
     (b) Definitions--(1) Applicant.  An applicant is a person
that has applied for registration under paragraph (e) of this
section.  
     (2) Bonded registrant.  A bonded registrant is a person that
has given a bond to the district director under paragraph (j) of
this section as a condition of registration. 
     (3) Gasohol bonding amount.  The gasohol bonding amount is
the product of--
     (i) The rate of tax applicable to later separation, as
described in 48.4081-6(f)(1)(iii); and
     (ii) The total number of gallons of gasoline expected to be
bought at the gasohol production tax rate by the gasohol blender
during a representative 6-month period (as determined by the
district director).
     (4) Penalized for a wrongful act.  A person has been
penalized for a wrongful act if the person has--
     (i) Been assessed any penalty under chapter 68 of the
Internal Revenue Code (or similar provision of the law of any
State) for fraudulently failing to file any return or pay any
tax, and the penalty has not been wholly abated, refunded, or
credited; 
     (ii) Been assessed any penalty under chapter 68 of the
Internal Revenue Code, such penalty has not been wholly abated,
refunded, or credited, and the district director determines that
the conduct resulting in the penalty is part of a consistent
pattern of failing to deposit, pay, or pay over a substantial
amount of tax;
     (iii) Been convicted of a crime under chapter 75 of the
Internal Revenue Code (or similar provision of the law of any
State), or of conspiracy to commit such a crime, and the
conviction has not been wholly reversed by a court of competent
jurisdiction; 
     (iv) Been convicted, under the laws of the United States or
any State, of a felony for which an element of the offense is
theft, fraud, or the making of false statements, and the
conviction has not been wholly reversed by a court of competent
jurisdiction; 
     (v) Been assessed any tax under section 4103 and the tax has
not been wholly abated, refunded, or credited; or
     (vi) Had its registration under section 4101 or 4222
revoked.
     (5) Related person.  A related person is a person that--
     (i) Directly or indirectly exercises control over an
activity of the applicant if the activity is described in
paragraph (c)(1) or (d) of this section;
     (ii) Owns, directly or indirectly, five percent or more of
the applicant;
     (iii) Is under a duty to assure the payment of a tax for
which the applicant is responsible;
     (iv) Is a member, with the applicant, of a group of
organizations (as defined in 1.52-1(b) of this chapter) that
would be treated as a group of trades or businesses under common
control for purposes of 1.52-1 of this chapter; or
     (v) Distributed or transferred assets to the applicant in a
transaction in which the applicant's basis in the assets is
determined by reference to the basis of the assets in the hands
of the distributor or transferor. 
     (6) Registrant.  A registrant is a person that the district
director has, in accordance with paragraph (g)(3) of this
section, registered under section 4101 and whose registration has
not been revoked or suspended.
     (c) Persons required to be registered--(1) In general.  A
person is required to be registered under section 4101 if the
person is a--
     (i) Blender;
     (ii) Enterer; 
     (iii) Refiner;
     (iv) Terminal operator; or
     (v) Position holder.
     (2) Bus and train operators.  Every operator of a bus or
train is required to be registered under section 4101 at any time
it incurs any liability for tax under section 4041 at the bus
rate (as described in 48.4082-4(b)(3)(i)) or the train rate (as
described in 48.4082-4(b)(3)(ii)). 
     (3) Consequences of failing to register.  For the criminal
penalty imposed for failure to register, see section 7232.  For
the civil penalty imposed for failure to register, see section
7272.
     (d) Persons that may, but are not required to, be
registered.  A person may, but is not required to, be registered
under section 4101 if the person is a--
     (1) Gasohol blender;
     (2) Industrial user; 
     (3) Throughputter that is not a position holder; or
     (4) Ultimate vendor of diesel fuel.
     (e) Application instructions.  Application for registration
under section 4101 must be made in accordance with the
instructions for Form 637 (or such other form as the Commissioner
may designate). 
     (f) Registration tests--(1) In general--(i) Persons other
than ultimate vendors.  Except as provided in paragraph
(f)(1)(ii) of this section, the district director will register
an applicant only if the district director determines that the
applicant meets the following three tests (collectively, the
registration tests):
     (A) The activity test of paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
     (B) The acceptable risk test of paragraph (f)(3) of this
section.
     (C) The adequate security test of paragraph (f)(4) of this
section.
     (ii) Ultimate vendors.  The district director will register
an applicant as an ultimate vendor of diesel fuel only if the
district director-- 
     (A) Determines that the applicant meets the activity test of
paragraph (f)(2) of this section; and
     (B) Is satisfied with the filing, deposit, payment, and
claim history for all federal taxes of the applicant and any
related person.
     (2) The activity test.  An applicant meets the activity test
of this paragraph (f)(2) only if the district director determines
that the applicant-- 
     (i) Is, in the course of its trade or business, regularly
engaged as an operator of a bus or train or in the characteristic
activity of a person described in paragraph (c)(1) or (d) of this
section; or
     (ii) Is likely to be (because of such factors as the
applicant's business experience, financial standing, or trade
connections), in the course of its trade or business, regularly
engaged as an operator of a bus or train or in the characteristic
activity of a person described in paragraph (c)(1) or (d) of this
section within a reasonable time after becoming registered under
section 4101.
     (3) Acceptable risk test--(i) In general.  An applicant
meets the acceptable risk test of this paragraph (f)(3) only  
if-- 
     (A) Neither the applicant nor a related person has been
penalized for a wrongful act; or
     (B) Even though the applicant or a related person has been
penalized for a wrongful act, the district director determines,
after review of evidence offered by the applicant, that the
registration of the applicant does not create a significant risk
of nonpayment or late payment of the tax imposed by sections
4041(a)(1) and 4081.
     (ii) Significant risk of nonpayment or late payment of tax. 
In making the determination described in paragraph (f)(3)(i)(B)
of this section, the district director may consider factors such
as the following:
     (A) The time elapsed since the applicant or related person
was penalized for a wrongful act.  
     (B) The present relationship between the applicant and any
related person that was penalized for any wrongful act.
     (C) The degree of rehabilitation of the person penalized for
any wrongful act.
     (D) The amount of bond given by the applicant.  In this
regard, the district director may accept a bond under paragraph
(j) of this section, without regard to the limits on the amount
of the bond set by paragraph (j)(2) of this section. 
     (4) Adequate security test--(i) In general.  An applicant
meets the adequate security test of this paragraph (f)(4) only if
the district director determines that the applicant has both
adequate financial resources and a satisfactory tax history, or
the applicant gives the district director a bond (under the
provisions of paragraph (j) of this section). 
     (ii) Adequate financial resources--(A) In general.  An
applicant has adequate financial resources only if the district
director determines that the applicant is financially capable of
paying--
     (1)  Its expected tax liability under sections 4041(a)(1)
and 4081 for a representative 6-month period (as determined by
the district director); 
     (2)  In the case of a terminal operator, the expected tax
liability under section 4081 of persons other than the terminal
operator with respect to taxable fuel removed at the racks of its
terminals during a representative 1-month period (as determined
by the district director); and 
     (3)  In the case of a gasohol blender, the gasohol bonding
amount.  
     (B)  Basis for determination.  The determination under this
paragraph (f)(4)(ii) must be based on financial information such
as the applicant's income statement, balance sheet or bond
ratings, or other information related to the applicant's
financial status. 
     (iii) Satisfactory tax history.  An applicant has a
satisfactory tax history only if the district director is
satisfied with the filing, deposit, and payment history for all
federal taxes of the applicant and any related person. 
     (g) Action on the application by the district director--(1)
Review of application.  The district director may investigate the
accuracy and completeness of any representations made by an
applicant, request any additional relevant information from the
applicant, and inspect the applicant's premises during normal
business hours without advance notice. 
     (2) Denial.  If the district director determines that an
applicant does not meet all of the applicable registration tests
described in paragraph (f) of this section, the district director
must notify the applicant, in writing, that its application for
registration is denied and state the basis for the denial.
     (3) Approval.  If the district director determines that an
applicant meets all of the applicable registration tests
described in paragraph (f) of this section, the district director
must register the applicant under section 4101 and issue the
applicant a letter of registration containing the effective date
of the registration.  The effective date of the registration must
be no earlier than the date on which the district director signs
the letter of registration.  A copy of an application for
registration (Form 637) is not a letter of registration.  
     (h) Terms and conditions of registration--(1) Affirmative
duties.  Each registrant must--
     (i) Make deposits, file returns, and pay taxes required by
the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations;
     (ii) Keep records sufficient to show the registrant's tax
liability under sections 4041(a)(1) and 4081 and payments or
deposits of such liability;
     (iii) Make all information reports required under section
4101(d) and 48.4101-2;
     (iv) Make available for inspection on demand by the Internal
Revenue Service during normal business hours records relevant to
a determination of tax liability under sections 4041(a)(1) and
4081; and
     (v) Notify the district director of any change (such as a
change in ownership) in the information the registrant submitted
in connection with its application for registration, or
previously submitted under this paragraph (h)(1)(v), within 10
days after the change occurs. 
     (2) Prohibited actions.  A registrant may not--
     (i) Sell, lease or otherwise allow another person to use its
registration; 
     (ii) Make any false statement to the district director in
connection with a submission under paragraph (h)(1) or (h)(3) of
this section; 
     (iii) Make any false statement on, or violate the terms   
of--
     (A) A notification certificate of a taxable fuel registrant
(as described in 48.4081-5(b)); or 
     (B) A certificate of a registered gasohol blender (as
described in 48.4081-6(c)(2)).
     (3) Additional terms and conditions for terminal operators--
(i) Notice required with respect to dyed diesel fuel.  A legible
and conspicuous notice stating: DYED DIESEL FUEL, NONTAXABLE USE
ONLY, PENALTY FOR TAXABLE USE must be provided by each terminal
operator to any person that receives dyed diesel fuel at a
terminal rack of that operator.  This notice must be provided by
the time of the removal and must appear on all shipping papers,
bills of lading, and similar documents that are provided by the
terminal operator to accompany the removal of the fuel.  
     (ii) Records to be maintained relating to removals of diesel
fuel.  Each terminal operator must keep the following information
with respect to each rack removal of diesel fuel at each terminal
it operates:
     (A) The bill of lading or other shipping document.
     (B) The record of whether the fuel was dyed and marked in
accordance with 48.4082-1.
     (C) The volume and date of the removal.
     (D) The identity of the person, such as a common carrier,
that physically received the fuel.
     (E) Any other information required by the Commissioner.
     (iii) Records to be maintained relating to dye.  With
respect to each of its terminals, a terminal operator must keep
records relating to dye inventories and usage. 
     (iv) Retention of information.  In addition to any other
requirement relating to the retention of records, the terminal
operator must--
     (A) Maintain the information described in paragraph
(h)(3)(ii) of this section at the terminal from which the removal
occurred for at least 3 months after the removal to which it
relates; and
     (B) Maintain the information described in paragraph
(h)(3)(iii) of this section at the terminal where the dye was
received for at least 3 months after the receipt. 
     (v) Prohibition on providing incorrect information.  In
connection with the removal of diesel fuel that is not dyed and
marked in accordance with 48.4082-1, a terminal operator may not
provide any person (including the position holder with respect to
the fuel) with any bill of lading, shipping paper, or similar
document indicating that the diesel fuel is dyed and marked in
accordance with 48.4082-1. 
     (i) Adverse actions by the district director against a
registrant--(1) Mandatory revocation or suspension.  The district
director must revoke or suspend the registration of any
registrant if the district director determines that the
registrant, at any time--
     (i) Does not meet one or more of the applicable registration
tests under paragraph (f) of this section and has not corrected
the deficiency within a reasonable period of time after
notification by the district director; 
     (ii) Has used its registration to evade, or attempt to
evade, the payment of any tax imposed by section 4041(a)(1) or
4081, or to postpone or in any manner to interfere with the
collection of any such tax, or to make a fraudulent claim for a
credit or payment;
     (iii) Has aided or abetted another person in evading, or
attempting to evade, payment of any tax imposed by section
4041(a)(1) or 4081, or in making a fraudulent claim for a credit
or payment; or
     (iv) Has sold, leased, or otherwise allowed another person
to use its registration. 
     (2) Remedial action permitted in other cases.  If the
district director determines that a registrant has, at any time,
failed to comply with the terms and conditions of registration
under paragraph (h) of this section, made a false statement to
the district director in connection with its application for
registration or retention of registration, or otherwise used its
registration in a manner that creates a significant risk of
nonpayment or late payment of tax, then the district director
may--
     (i) Revoke or suspend the registrant's registration;
     (ii) In the case of a registrant other than an ultimate
vendor, require the registrant to give a bond under the
provisions of paragraph (j) of this section as a condition of
retaining its registration; and
     (iii) In the case of a registrant other than an ultimate
vendor, require the registrant to file monthly or semimonthly
returns under 40.6011(a)-1(b) of this chapter as a condition of
retaining its registration.
     (3) Action by the district director to revoke or suspend a
registration.  If the district director revokes or suspends a
registration, the district director must so notify the registrant
in writing and state the basis for the revocation or suspension. 
The effective date of the revocation or suspension may not be
earlier than the date on which the district director notifies the
registrant.
     (j) Bonds--(1) Form.  Each bond given to the district
director as a condition of registration under paragraph (f)(4)(i)
or (i)(2)(ii) of this section must be executed in the form
prescribed by the district director.  Each bond must be--
     (i) A public debt obligation of the United States
Government; 
     (ii) An obligation the principal and interest of which are
unconditionally guaranteed by the United States Government;
     (iii) A bond executed by a surety company listed in
Department of the Treasury Circular 570 as an acceptable surety
or reinsurer of federal bonds (a surety bond); or
     (iv) Any other bond with security (including liens under
section 4101(b)(1)(B)) considered acceptable by the district
director.
     (2) Amount of bond.  A bond given under this paragraph (j)
must be in an amount that the district director determines will
ensure timely collection of the taxes imposed by sections
4041(a)(1) and 4081, taking into account the applicant's
financial capabilities, tax history, and expected liability under
sections 4041(a)(1) and 4081.  The district director may increase
or decrease the amount of the required bond to take into account
changes in the applicant's financial capabilities, tax history,
and expected liability under sections 4041(a)(1) and 4081. 
However, in no case may the amount of the bond be greater than
the amount that the district director determines is equal to-- 
     (i) The applicant's expected tax liability under sections
4041(a)(1) and 4081 for a representative 6-month period (as
determined by the district director); 
     (ii) In the case of a terminal operator, the expected tax
liability of persons other than the terminal operator under
section 4081 with respect to taxable fuel removed at the racks of
its terminals (determined as if all removals of taxable fuel were
taxable) during a representative 1-month period (as determined by
the district director); and 
     (iii) In the case of a gasohol blender, the gasohol bonding
amount.
     (3) Collection of taxes from a bond.  If a bonded registrant
does not pay the amount of tax it incurs under section 4041(a)(1)
or 4081 by the time prescribed in section 6151 for paying that
tax, the district director may collect the amount of the unpaid
tax (including penalties and interest with respect to that tax)
from the bonded registrant's bond.
     (4) Termination of bonds--(i) Surety bonds.  A surety on a
bond may give written notice to the district director and the
bonded registrant that the surety desires to be relieved of
liability under the bond after a certain date, which date must be
at least 60 days after the receipt of the notice by the district
director.  The surety will be relieved of any liability that the
bonded registrant incurs after the date named in the notice. 
However, the surety remains liable for the amount of tax that the
bonded registrant incurred under sections 4041(a)(1) and 4081
during the term of the bond and for penalties and interest with
respect to that tax.
     (ii) Other bonds.  A bond (other than a surety bond) given
to the district director may be returned to the bonded registrant
only after the earlier of--
     (A) The district director's determination that the bonded
registrant has paid all taxes that the bonded registrant incurred
under sections 4041(a)(1) and 4081 during the period covered by
the bond and any penalties and interest with respect to the
taxes; 
     (B) The expiration of the period for assessment of the taxes
that the bonded registrant incurred under sections 4041(a)(1) and
4081 taxes during the period covered by the bond, as determined
under the provisions of subchapter A of chapter 66 of the
Internal Revenue Code; or
     (C) The date that the district director receives from the
registrant a substitute bond given under this paragraph (j).
     (5) Determination that bond is no longer required.  If the
district director determines that the bonded registrant meets the
adequate security test of paragraph (f)(4) of this section
without a bond, the registrant is to be released from the
obligation to give a bond as a condition of registration under
section 4101.
     (k) Cross references.  For a rule relating to the filing of
monthly and semimonthly returns by certain persons that are
registered under section 4101, see 40.6011(a)-1(b)(2) of this
chapter.  For rules relating to the tax on taxable fuel, see
48.4081-1 through 48.4083-1.  For rules relating to claims by
registered ultimate vendors, see 48.6427-9.
     (l) Effective dates.  (1) Except as otherwise provided in
this paragraph (l), this section is applicable as of January 1,
1994.
     (2) Paragraph (c)(1) of this section (relating to persons
required to be registered) is applicable as of January 1, 1995.
     (3) Paragraph (h)(3)(iii) of this section (relating to
certain recordkeeping requirements) is applicable as of July 1,
1996. 
     Par. 30.  Section 48.4101-2 is added to read as follows:
48.4101-2 Information reporting. 
     (a) In general--(1) Taxable fuel registrants.  Each taxable
fuel registrant must make a return showing--
     (i) The name and registration number (if any) of each person
that is a position holder at each terminal it operates; 
     (ii) The amount of taxable fuel received at each terminal it
operates;
     (iii) The identity of each position holder with respect 
to--
     (A) All rack removals of taxable fuel from each terminal it
operates, and the volume and dates of the removals; and 
     (B) In the case of rack removals of diesel fuel, whether the
fuel was dyed and marked at the operator's terminal in accordance
with 48.4082-1; 
     (iv) The amount of taxable fuel stored at each terminal it
operates;
     (v) The destination (by state) of all taxable fuel removed
at a terminal rack of each terminal it operates, to the extent
such information has been provided to the registrant; 
     (vi) The name and registration number (if any) of the
operator of each terminal at which it is a position holder; 
     (vii) The volume and date of the removal with respect to all
rack removals of taxable fuel for which it is the position
holder;
     (viii) In the case of nonbulk removals and entries of
gasoline blendstocks for which it would be liable for tax but for
the special rule in 48.4081-4(c), the name and registration
number of each operator of each refinery and terminal where the
gasoline blendstocks are received; 
     (ix) The name and registration number (if any) of each
person to which it sells (within the meaning of 48.4081-1)
taxable fuel located in the bulk transfer/terminal system;
     (x) The name and registration number of each person from
which it receives a certificate described in 48.4081-6(c)
(relating to certificate of registered gasohol blender); 
     (xi) With respect to any liability incurred under 48.4081-
3(e) (relating to tax on bulk transfers not received at an
approved terminal or refinery)--
     (A) The date on which the removal of the taxable fuel from a
pipeline or vessel gave rise to the liability; and 
     (B) The location of the taxable fuel at the time of the
removal; and 
     (xii) Any other information required by the Commissioner. 
     (2) Gasohol blenders.  Each registered gasohol blender must
make a return showing, with respect to each batch of gasohol it
produced from gasoline it bought at the gasohol production tax
rate--
     (i) The name and registration number of the person that sold
it the gasoline;
     (ii) The date and location of the purchase of the gasoline;
     (iii) The volume of the gasoline;
     (iv) The name, address, and employer identification number
of the person that sold it the alcohol;
     (v) The date and location of the purchase of the alcohol;
     (vi) The volume and type of the alcohol; and
     (vii) Any other information required by the Commissioner.
     (3) Pipeline and vessel operators.  Each operator of a
pipeline or vessel that makes a bulk transfer of taxable fuel to
a terminal or refinery must make a return showing--
     (i) The location of the terminal or refinery where the
taxable fuel was delivered;
     (ii) The date of the delivery; and
     (iii) Any other information required by the Commissioner.
     (b) Form and time of return.  Each return required under
this section must be made at the time and in the form required by
the Commissioner.
     (c) Consequences for failure to make a return.  For the
consequences for failing to make an information return required
by this section, see 48.4101-1(i) (relating to adverse actions
against a registrant) and section 6721 (relating to a penalty for
failure to file an information return). 
     (d) Effective date.  This section is applicable as of
April 1, 1996.
48.4101-2T, 48.4101-3, 48.4101-3T, and 48.4101-4T  [Removed]
     Par. 31.  Sections 48.4101-2T, 48.4101-3, 48.4101-3T, and
48.4101-4T are removed.
     Par. 32.  Section 48.4102-1 is amended as follows:
     1.  Paragraph (a) is revised.
     2.  Paragraph (b)(1) is amended by removing the language "on
the sale or use of gasoline or lubricating oil, respectively,".
     3.  Paragraph (b)(2) is amended by removing "gasoline or
lubricating oil" each place it appears and adding "taxable fuel
or aviation fuel" in its place. 
     The revision reads as follows:
48.4102-1 Inspection of records by State or local tax officers. 
     (a) Inspection of records maintained by taxpayer.  The
records that a taxpayer is required to keep with respect to the
taxes imposed by section 4081 or 4091 must be open to inspection
by any officer of any State or political subdivision thereof, or
of the District of Columbia, who is charged with the enforcement
or collection of any tax on taxable fuel or aviation fuel. 
* * * * *
48.4221 [Removed]
     Par. 33.  Section 48.4221 is removed.
     Par. 34.  Section 48.4221-1 is amended as follows:
     1.  Paragraph (a) is revised.
     2.  Paragraph (b)(2)(iv) is amended by adding "and" at the
end.
     3.  Paragraph (b)(2)(v) is revised.
     4.  Paragraphs (b)(2)(vi) through (b)(2)(xii) are removed. 
     5.  Paragraph (b)(3) is removed and paragraphs (b)(4) and
(b)(5) are redesignated as paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4),
respectively. 
     The revised provisions read as follows:
48.4221-1 Tax-free sales; general rule.
     (a) Application of regulations under section 4221--(1) In
general.  The regulations under section 4221 provide rules under
which the manufacturer, producer, or importer of an article
subject to tax under chapter 32 (or the retailer of an article
subject to tax under subchapter A or C of chapter 31) may sell
the article tax free under section 4221.
     (2) Limitations.  The following restrictions must be taken
into account in applying the regulations under section 4221:
     (i) The exemptions under section 4221(a)(4) and (a)(5) do
not apply to the tax imposed by section 4064 (gas guzzler tax).
     (ii) The exemptions under section 4221 do not apply to the
tax imposed by section 4081 (gasoline and diesel fuel tax).
     (iii) The exemptions under section 4221 do not apply to the
tax imposed by section 4091 (aviation fuel tax).  For rules
relating to tax-free sales of aviation fuel, see section 4092 and
the regulations thereunder.
     (iv) The exemptions under section 4221 do not apply to the
tax imposed by section 4121 (coal tax). 
     (v) The exemptions under section 4221(a)(3) through (a)(5)
do not apply to the tax imposed by section 4131 (vaccine tax). 
In addition, the exemption under section 4221(a)(2) applies to
the vaccine tax only to the extent provided in 48.4221-3(e)
(relating to tax-free sales of vaccine for export). 
     (vi) The exemptions under section 4221(a) apply only in
those cases where the exportation or use referred to is to occur
before any other use. 
     (b) * * *
     (2) * * * 
     (v) Section 4221(e)(3) relating to the sale of tires used on
intercity, local, or school buses (see 48.4221-8).
* * * * *
     Par. 35.  Section 48.4221-2 is amended by:
     1.  Removing from the first sentence of paragraph (a)(1) the
language "(other than a tire or inner tube taxable under section
4071, which are given special treatment under sections 4221(e)(2)
and (4), and 48.4221-7 and 48.4221-8)" and adding "(other than
a tire taxable under section 4071, which is given special
treatment under section 4221(e)(2) and 48.4221-7)" in its place.
     2. Removing paragraph (a)(2) and redesignating paragraph
(a)(3) as paragraph (a)(2). 
     3. Revising paragraph (b). 
     The revision reads as follows:
48.4221-2  Tax-free sale of articles to be used for, or resold
for, further manufacture. 
* * * * *
     (b) Circumstances under which an article is considered to
have been sold for use in further manufacture.  (1) An article
shall be treated as sold for use in further manufacture if the
article is sold for use by the buyer as material in the
manufacture or production of, or as a component part of, another
article taxable under chapter 32 of the Internal Revenue Code.
     (2) An article is used as material in the manufacture or
production of, or as a component of, another article if it is
incorporated in, or is a part or accessory of, the other article
when the other article is sold by the manufacturer.  In addition,
an article is considered to be used as material in the
manufacture of another article if it is consumed in whole or in
part in testing such other article.  However, an article that is
consumed in the manufacturing process other than in testing, so
that it is not a physical part of the manufactured article, is
not considered to have been used as material in the manufacture
of, or as a component part of, another article.  
* * * * *
     Par. 36.  Section 48.4221-5 is amended as follows:
     1.  Paragraph (c)(1) is amended by:
     a.  Removing the first sentence.
     b.  Removing the language "If a State or local government is
not registered, the" and adding "The" in its place in the new
first sentence. 
     2.  In paragraph (d), the first sentence is amended by:
     a.  Removing the language "(whether on the basis of a
registration number or an exemption certificate)".
     b.  Removing the language "(such as gasoline that is" and
adding "(such as tires that are" in its place.  
48.4221-8, 48.4221-9, 48.4221-10   [Removed]
     Par. 37.  Sections 48.4221-8, 48.4221-9, and 48.4221-10 are
removed. 
48.4221-11  [Redesignated as 48.4221-8]
     Par. 38.  Section 48.4221-11 is redesignated as 48.4221-8.
48.4221-12  [Removed]
     Par. 39.  Section 48.4221-12 is removed. 
     Par. 40.  In 48.4222(a)-1, paragraphs (a) and (b) are
revised to read as follows:
48.4222(a)-1 Registration. 
     (a) General rule.  Except as provided in 48.4222(b)-1,
tax-free sales under section 4221 may be made only if the
manufacturer, first purchaser, and second purchaser, as the case
may be, have been registered by the Internal Revenue Service. 
     (b) Application instructions.  Application for registration
under section 4222 must be made in accordance with instructions
for Form 637 (or such other form as the Commissioner may
designate). 
* * * * *
     Par. 41.  In 48.4222(b)-1, paragraph (a) is revised to read
as follows:
48.4222(b)-1 Exceptions to the requirement for registration.  
     (a) State and local governments.  The Internal Revenue
Service will not register State or local governments under
section 4222.  To establish the right to sell articles tax free
to a State or local government, the manufacturer must obtain the
information described in 48.4221-5(c). 
* * * * *
48.4222(d)-1  [Amended]
     Par. 42.  Section 48.4222(d)-1 is amended by:
     1.  Removing paragraphs (a), (b), and (c).
     2.  Redesignating paragraph (d) as paragraph (a).
     3.  Removing paragraphs (e) and (f).
     4.  Redesignating paragraph (g) as paragraph (b). 
48.6206-1  [Removed]
     Par. 43.  Section 48.6206-1 is removed. 
48.6416(b)(2)-2   [Amended]
     Par. 44.  In 48.6416(b)(2)-2, paragraphs (g) through (k)
are removed.
48.6416(g)-1  [Removed]
     Par. 45.  Section 48.6416(g)-1 is removed.
48.6421-3  [Amended]
     Par. 46.  In 48.6421-3, paragraph (d)(2) is amended by
removing from the first sentence the language "Form 843" and
adding "Form 8849 (or on such other form as the Commissioner may
designate)" in its place.
6424-0 through 48.6424-6  [Removed]
     Par. 47.  Sections 48.6424-0 through 48.6424-6 are removed.
48.6427-3  [Amended]
     Par. 48.  In 48.6427-3, paragraph (d)(2) is amended by
removing from the first sentence the language "Form 843" and
adding "Form 8849 (or on such other form as the Commissioner may
designate)" in its place.
48.6427-7  [Amended]
     Par. 49.  In 48.6427-7, paragraph (g)(4) is amended by
removing the language "Form 843 (Claim)" and adding "Form 8849
(or such other form as the Commissioner may designate)" in its
place.    
     Par. 50.  Sections 48.6427-8 and 48.6427-9 are added to read
as follows:    
48.6427-8 Claims by ultimate purchasers with respect to diesel
fuel taxed after December 31, 1993. 
     (a) Overview.  This section provides the rules for obtaining
a credit or payment with respect to undyed diesel fuel that was
taxed after December 31, 1993, and that was used in a nontaxable
use (other than on a farm for farming purposes or by a State).  A
credit or payment for undyed diesel fuel used on a farm for
farming purposes or by a State is allowable only to a registered
ultimate vendor under the rules of 48.6427-9. 
     (b) Conditions to allowance of credit or payment--(1) In
general.  Except as provided in section 6427(l)(5), a claim for
credit or payment with respect to diesel fuel is allowable under
section 6427(l) only if--
     (i) Tax was imposed by section 4081 on the diesel fuel to
which the claim relates; 
     (ii) The claimant produced or bought the fuel and did not
resell it in the United States;
     (iii) The claimant has filed a timely claim for a credit or
payment that contains the information required under paragraph
(d) of this section; 
     (iv) The fuel was not bought under a certificate described
in 48.6427-9(e)(2) (relating to certificate of farmer or State
to support claim of ultimate vendor); 
     (v) The fuel was not used on a farm for farming purposes (as
defined in 48.6420-4) or by a State; and
     (vi) The fuel was either--
     (A) Used in a use described in 48.4082-4(c)(3) through
(c)(10);
     (B) Exported; 
     (C) Used other than as a fuel in a propulsion engine of a
diesel-powered highway vehicle or diesel-powered boat;
     (D) Used as a fuel in a propulsion engine of a diesel-
powered train; or
     (E) Used as a fuel in the propulsion engine of a diesel-
powered bus if the bus was used in a use described in section
6427(b)(1) (after the application of section 6427(b)(3)).
     (2) Examples.  The following examples illustrate this
paragraph (b).
     Example 1.  (i) In September 1996, F bought 250 gallons of
undyed diesel fuel.  In October 1996, F used 200 gallons of the
fuel in a farm tractor.  This use qualifies as use on a farm for
farming purposes (as defined in 48.6420-4).  The farm tractor is
not a diesel-powered highway vehicle (as defined in 48.4081-
1(h)).  F used the remaining 50 gallons to heat F's residence.  F
filed a complete and timely claim for a credit relating to the
250 gallons.

     (ii) A credit or payment is not allowable to F with respect
to the 200 gallons of diesel fuel used in the farm tractor.  Even
though this fuel was used other than as a fuel in a propulsion
engine of a diesel-powered highway vehicle (thus meeting the
condition in paragraph (b)(1)(vi)(C) of this section), the
condition in paragraph (b)(1)(v) of this section is not satisfied
because the fuel was used on a farm for farming purposes. 

     (iii) A credit is allowable to F with respect to the 50
gallons F used for heating purposes because the conditions in
paragraph (b)(1) of this section have been met.  F used this fuel
other than as a fuel in a propulsion engine of a diesel-powered
highway vehicle and the use of the fuel for residential heating
is not use on a farm for farming purposes. 
     Example 2.  (i) In September 1996, W, a wholesale
distributor, sold 3,500 gallons of diesel fuel on which tax has
been imposed to C, a construction company located in the United
States.  W's selling price to C did not include an amount equal
to the federal excise tax on the fuel.  C used the fuel other
than as a fuel in a propulsion engine of a diesel-powered highway
vehicle or diesel-powered boat.  Both W and C file a complete and
timely claim for a credit relating to the fuel.

     (ii) Because W resold the fuel in the United States, the
condition of paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section is not met. 
Thus, W is not allowed a credit or payment with respect to the
fuel.

     (iii) C is eligible for a credit or payment with respect to
the fuel because the conditions to allowance in paragraph (b)(1)
of this section have been met.  The conditions to allowance do
not include a requirement that C buy the fuel at a price that
includes the amount of the tax.  
     (c) Form of claim.  Each claim for an income tax credit
under this section must be made on Form 4136 (or on such other
form as the Commissioner may designate) in accordance with the
instructions for that form.  Each claim for a payment under this
section must be made on Form 8849 (or on such other form as the
Commissioner may designate) in accordance with the instructions
for that form.  
     (d) Content of claim.  Each claim for a credit or payment
under this section must contain the following information with
respect to all the diesel fuel covered by the claim:
     (1) The total number of gallons covered by the claim. 
     (2) A statement by the claimant that tax has been imposed on
the diesel fuel covered by the claim.
     (3) The use made of the diesel fuel covered by the claim
described by reference to specific categories listed in paragraph
(b)(1)(vi) of this section (such as use in a boat employed in
commercial fishing or the exclusive use of a nonprofit
educational organization). 
     (4) If the diesel fuel covered by the claim was exported, a
declaration that the claimant has proof of exportation (as
described in 48.4221-3(d)(1)).
     (5) A declaration that the claimant has in its possession
the name and address of the person(s) that sold the diesel fuel
to the claimant and the date(s) of the purchase(s).
     (e) Time and place for filing claim.  For rules relating to
the time for filing a claim under section 6427, see section
6427(i).  A claim under this section is not filed unless it
contains all the information required by paragraph (d) of this
section and is filed at the place required by the form.
     (f) Effective date.  This section is effective January 1,
1994, except for paragraph (b)(1)(v) of this section, which is
effective for diesel fuel bought by ultimate purchasers after
June 30, 1994. 
48.6427-9 Claims by registered ultimate vendors with respect to
diesel fuel taxed after December 31, 1993. 
     (a) Overview.  This section provides the rules for obtaining
a credit or payment with respect to undyed diesel fuel that was
taxed after December 31, 1993, and that was used on a farm for
farming purposes or by a State. 
     (b) Definitions.  (1) An ultimate vendor, as used in this
section, is a person that sells undyed diesel fuel to--
     (i) The owner, tenant, or operator of a farm for use by such
person on a farm for farming purposes (as defined in 48.6420-4);
     (ii) A person other than the owner, tenant, or operator of a
farm for use by such person for any of the purposes described in
48.6420-4(d) (relating to cultivating, raising, or harvesting);
or
     (iii) Any State for its exclusive use.
     (2) A registered ultimate vendor is--
     (i) An ultimate vendor that is registered under section 4101
as an ultimate vendor; or
     (ii) With respect to a claim filed before January 1, 1995,
an ultimate vendor that is registered as a producer of diesel
fuel on December 31, 1993, if the registration has not been
revoked or suspended. 
     (c) Conditions to allowance of credit or payment.  A claim
for a credit or payment with respect to diesel fuel is allowable
under section 6427(l)(5) only if--
     (1) Tax was imposed by section 4081 on the diesel fuel to
which the claim relates; 
     (2) The claimant sold the diesel fuel to--
     (i) The owner, tenant, or operator of a farm for use by such
person on a farm for farming purposes (as defined in 48.6420-4);
     (ii) A person other than the owner, tenant, or operator of a
farm for use by such person for any of the purposes described in
48.6420-4(d) (relating to cultivating, raising, or harvesting);
or
     (iii) Any State for its exclusive use;
     (3) The claimant is a registered ultimate vendor; and
     (4) The claimant has filed a timely claim for a credit or
payment that contains the information required under paragraph
(e) of this section. 
     (d) Form of claim.  Each claim for an income tax credit
under this section must be made on Form 4136 (or on such other
form as the Commissioner may designate) in accordance with the
instructions for that form.  Each claim for a payment under this
section must be made on Form 8849 (or on such other form as the
Commissioner may designate) in accordance with the instructions
for that form.  
     (e) Content of claim--(1) In general.  Each claim for credit
or payment under this section must contain the following
information with respect to all the diesel fuel covered by the
claim:
     (i) The total number of gallons covered by the claim.
     (ii) A statement by the claimant that tax has been imposed
on the diesel fuel covered by the claim.
     (iii) The claimant's registration number. 
     (iv) The name and taxpayer identification number of each
person that bought diesel fuel from the claimant in a transaction
described in paragraph (c)(2) of this section and the number of
gallons that the claimant sold to that person.
     (v) A statement that the claimant--
     (A) Has not included the amount of the tax in its sales
price of the diesel fuel and has not collected the amount of tax
from its buyer;
     (B) Has repaid the amount of the tax to the ultimate
purchaser of the fuel; or
     (C) Has obtained the written consent of its buyer to the
allowance of the claim. 
     (vi) For claims relating to sales by the claimant after
March 31, 1994, a statement that the claimant has in its
possession an unexpired certificate described in paragraph (e)(2)
of this section and the claimant has no reason to believe any
information in the certificate is false.
     (vii) For claims relating to sales by the claimant before
April 1, 1994, either the statement described in paragraph
(e)(1)(vi) of this section or a statement that--
     (A) The claimant has in its possession an unexpired
exemption certificate relating to tax-free sales of diesel fuel
for use on a farm for farming purposes or for the exclusive use
of a State;
     (B) The certificate was received from the buyer before
January 1, 1994; and
     (C) The claimant has no reason to believe any information in
the certificate is false. 
     (2) Certificate--(i) In general.  The certificate to be
provided to the ultimate vendor consists of a statement that is
signed under penalties of perjury by a person with authority to
bind the buyer, is in substantially the same form as the model
certificate provided in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section, and
contains all information necessary to complete such model
certificate.  A new certificate must be given if any information
in the current certificate changes.  The certificate may be
included as part of any business records normally used to
document a sale.  The certificate expires on the earlier of the
following dates:
     (A) The date one year after the effective date of the
certificate.
     (B) The date a new certificate is provided to the seller.
     (ii) Model certificate.
             CERTIFICATE OF FARMING USE OR STATE USE
     (To support vendor's claim for a credit or payment under
section 6427 of the Internal Revenue Code.)
                                                            
                                                            
Name, address, and employer identification number of vendor
     The undersigned buyer ("Buyer") hereby certifies the
following under penalties of perjury: 
     Buyer will use the diesel fuel to which this certificate
relates--(check one)
      On a farm for farming purposes (as defined in 48.6420-4(c)
of the Manufacturers and Retailers Excise Tax Regulations) and
Buyer is the owner, tenant, or operator of the farm on which the
fuel will be used;
      On a farm (as defined in 48.6420-4(c)) for any of the
purposes described in paragraph (d) of that section (relating to
cultivating, raising, or harvesting) and Buyer is a person that
is not the owner, tenant, or operator of the farm on which the
fuel will be used; or
      For the exclusive use of a State or local government, or
the District of Columbia.
     This certificate applies to the following (complete as
applicable): 
     If this is a single purchase certificate, check here     
and enter:
1. Invoice or delivery ticket number                      
2.       (number of gallons) 
     If this is a certificate covering all purchases under a
specified account or order number, check here       and enter: 
1. Effective date                 
2. Expiration date                 
(period not to exceed 1 year after the effective date)
3. Buyer account or order number                  
     Buyer will provide a new certificate to the vendor if any
information in this certificate changes. 
     If Buyer uses the diesel fuel to which this certificate
relates for a purpose other than stated in the certificate Buyer
will be liable for tax. 
     Buyer understands that the fraudulent use of this
certificate may subject Buyer and all parties making such
fraudulent use of this certificate to a fine or imprisonment, or
both, together with the costs of prosecution.
                                                        
Printed or typed name of person signing 
                                                        
Title of person signing
                                                        
Name of Buyer
                                                         
Employer identification number
                                                        
Address of Buyer
                                                       
Signature and date signed

     (f) Time and place for filing claim.  For rules relating to
the time for filing a claim under section 6427, see section
6427(i).  A claim under this section is not filed unless it
contains all the information required by paragraph (e) of this
section and is filed at the place required by the form.
     (g) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994.  
48.6427-8T and 48.6427-9T  [Removed]
     Par. 51.  Sections 48.6427-8T and 48.6427-9T are removed.
48.6675-1  [Removed]
     Par. 52.  Section 48.6675-1 is removed.
     Par. 53. Section 48.6714-1 is added to read as follows:
48.6714-1 Penalty for misuse of dyed diesel fuel.  
     (a) In general.  If any person willfully alters, or attempts
to alter, the strength or composition of any dye or marking done
pursuant to 48.4082-1 in any dyed fuel, then section 6714(a)(3)
provides that such person shall pay a penalty in addition to any
tax.  The penalty imposed by section 6714(a)(3) will not apply in
the following cases:
     (1) Diesel fuel that satisfies the dyeing and marking
requirements of 48.4082-1(b) and (c) is blended with any undyed
liquid and the resulting product satisfies the dyeing and marking
requirements of 48.4082-1(b) and (c).
     (2) Diesel fuel that satisfies the dyeing and marking
requirements of 48.4082-1(b) and (c) is blended with any other
liquid (other than diesel fuel) that contains the type and amount
of dye and marker required for diesel fuel dyed and marked in
accordance with 48.4082-1(b) and (c).
     (3) Diesel fuel that is dyed one color in accordance with
48.4082-1(b) is blended with diesel fuel that is dyed another
color in accordance with 48.4082-1(b). 
     (4) Diesel fuel that does not satisfy the dyeing and marking
requirements of 48.4082-1(b) and (c) is blended with diesel fuel
that satisfies the dyeing and marking requirements of 
48.4082-1(b) and (c) and the blending occurs as part of a use
described in 48.4082-4(c) or 48.6427-8(b)(vi)(C), (D), or (E).
     (b) Effective date.  This section is effective 
January 1, 1994.
PART 602--OMB CONTROL NUMBERS UNDER THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT
     Par. 54.  The authority citation for part 602 continues to
read as follows:
     Authority:  26 U.S.C. 7805.     Par. 55.  In 602.101, paragraph (c) is amended as follows:
     1.  Removing the following entries from the table:
602.101  OMB Control numbers. 
* * * * *
     (c) * * *
                                                            
CFR part or section where                 Current OMB
identified and described                  control number
                                                            

* * * * *

42.5(b)...............................1545-1206
* * * * *
48.4041-2T............................1545-0143
* * * * *
48.4082-2T............................1545-1418
48.4101-1.............................1545-0023
                                     1545-0725
                                      1545-0014
48.4101-2T............................1545-0725
48.4101-3T............................1545-1418
48.4101-4T............................1545-1418
* * * * * 
48.6427-8T............................1545-1418
48.6427-9T............................1545-1418

* * * * *
                                                            
       2.  Adding entries in numerical order to the table to
read as follows:
602.101  OMB Control numbers. 
* * * * *
       (c) * * *
                                                            
CFR part or section where                 Current OMB
identified and described                  control number
                                                            

* * * * *

48.4082-2.............................1545-1418
48.4101-1.............................1545-1418
48.4101-2.............................1545-1418
* * * * *
48.6427-8.............................1545-1418
48.6427-9.............................1545-1418

* * * * *
                                                            

                              Margaret Milner Richardson
                                              
                             Commissioner of Internal Revenue

Approved:  December 18, 1995
                      Leslie Samuels
             Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
