Evaluation of Violence Prevention Programs in Middle Schools.


Series: NIJ Update
Published: September 1995
3 pages
6,099 bytes

Evaluation of Violence Prevention Programs in
Middle Schools

Adolescents are at high risk for violent crime.
Although they make up only 14 percent of the
population age 12 and over, 30 percent of all
violent crimes--1.9 million--were committed against
them. Because crimes against adolescents are likely
to be committed by offenders of the same age (as
well as same sex and race), preventing violence
among and against adolescents is a twofold
challenge. Adolescents are at risk of being both
victims and perpetrators of violence.
A 16-month evaluation sponsored by the National
Institute of Justice (NIJ) compared the separate
and combined impact of the following two New York
City middle school violence prevention programs
from February 1993 to June 1994:

o Project S.T.O.P. (Schools Teaching Options for
Peace), a traditional conflict resolution program,
which included a curriculum and peer mediation.

o The Safe Harbor Program, which included a
20-session curriculum, a counseling component, and
a schoolwide anti-violence campaign.

The study showed that students at high risk for
personal experiences with and exposure to severe
forms of conflict sought participation in these
programs. The Project S.T.O.P. program led students
to use reasoning more frequently to resolve
conflicts, and the Safe Harbor program changed
their beliefs in the necessity of violent
retaliation.

Methods

Students in the four selected urban middle schools
had a great deal of experience with and exposure to
violence. At the start of the study, 40 percent of
these students stated that they had seen someone
shot or stabbed, and 20 percent said that their own
lives had been threatened. During an interview one
student asserted, "Violence happens in all schools.
It doesn't make any difference what school you're
in."

In an effort to reduce the violence, School A
established Project S.T.O.P. and Schools B, C, and
D offered both Project S.T.O.P. and Safe Harbor.
The original goal of the evaluation was to assess
the combined effects of the programs, as well as
the singular impact of each. Project S.T.O.P. was a
collaborative effort coordinated by three agencies,
and Safe Harbor was coordinated exclusively by the
city's Victim Services agency. In addition, both
programs were housed separately within each school,
and teachers and students tended to be more
involved in one program or the other. Therefore,
rather than comparing the targeted approach of
School A with the "comprehensive approach" of
Schools B, C, and D, the evaluation focused on
assessing the programs individually.

Data sources for the evaluation included
self-reported background inventories on students'
experiences with violence, self-administered tests
completed by students, semi-structured interviews
with 72 students and 37 teachers, and school
statistics on disciplinary actions related to
fighting and weapons possession. The effects of
program participation were evaluated and separate
analyses were conducted for the following: 

o Attitudes about the acceptability of violence.

o Knowledge of and skills in how to resolve
conflict nonviolently.

o Aggressive behavior.

o Use of victim services.

o Number of disciplinary actions taken and cases of
weapons possession.

The results were coded so that the higher the
score, the more positive and constructive the
attitude.

Results

Relationship between victimization and program use.
Higher participation in one or both of the violence
prevention programs was associated with higher
victimization. This is explained by two factors:

o Some students were referred to the programs because
they were victims or perpetrators of violence.

o A significant aspect of Safe Harbor focused on
increasing awareness of victimization and providing
a "safe place." The program may have specifically
attracted students who were victimized.

Attitudes toward retaliation. During the evaluation
period, students who participated in the Safe
Harbor program were less likely to advocate
retaliation in response to conflict than students
with no exposure. Students who had a high exposure
to Project S.T.O.P. were more knowledgeable about
rape and sexual assault and maintained fewer
negative attitudes toward rape victims than
students with no exposure.

Attitudes toward achieving respect through
violence. Participation in both programs also
altered the belief that respect was achieved
through violence. Students who had moderate to high
levels of exposure to Project S.T.O.P. and Safe
Harbor scored higher in this area than students who
had no exposure. A significant effect of Project
S.T.O.P. was a reduction in the feeling of
helplessness among students with high levels of
program participation.

Use of reason to resolve conflicts. Students who
had high levels of exposure to Project S.T.O.P.
tended to use reasoning more frequently than
students who had no exposure.

Conclusion

Students in urban middle schools are at high risk
for personal experiences with and exposure to
extreme forms of violence; these experiences are
then reflected in the students' own conflict styles
and behaviors. The effects of both Project S.T.O.P.
and Safe Harbor on attitudes of more than 2,000
middle school students were positive and strong.
Many of the teachers noticed how participation in
these programs often changed their students' lives.
One teacher in School B remarked, "I've seen some
rough kids become peer mediators and sometimes it's
like a metamorphosis. It completely changes them
because they look at things differently...."
----------------------------------------------
A forthcoming Research in Brief, Evaluation of
Violence Prevention Programs in Middle Schools, by
Tanya Bannister of Victim Services, will elaborate
on these findings. Contact the National Criminal
Justice Reference Service for information: 800-851-
3420, or e-mail askncjrs@ncjrs.aspensys.com.

